Page 1 of 28 
 
 
THE CORPORATION OF THE TOWN OF LINCOLN 
BY-LAW NO. 2025-40 
A BY-LAW TO ESTABLISH AND REGULATE 
 
THE DESTRUCTION OR INJURING OF TREES WITHIN THE 
TOWN OF LINCOLN 
 
WHEREAS: 
 
1. 
Subsection 5(3) of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.25, as 
amended (“Municipal Act, 2001”) provides that a municipal power shall 
be exercised by by- law; and 
 
2. 
Section 9 of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a municipality has the 
capacity, rights, powers and privileges of a natural person for the 
purpose of exercising its authority under the Municipal Act, 2001 or any 
other Act; and 
 
3. 
Pursuant to subsection 135(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001, without 
limiting sections 9 and 10, a municipality may prohibit or regulate the 
destruction or injuring of Trees; and 
 
4. 
Pursuant to subsection 135(7) of the Municipal Act, 2001, without 
limiting sections 9 and 10, a municipality may require that a permit be 
obtained to injure or destroy Trees, and impose conditions to a permit, 
including conditions relating to the manner in which destruction occurs 
and the qualifications of persons authorized to injure or destroy Trees; 
and 
 
5. 
Subsection 391(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a municipality 
may impose fees and charges on persons; and 
 
6. 
Section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a municipality may 
pass by- laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the 
municipality passed under the statute is guilty of an offence; and 
 
7. 
Sections 429, 431, 444 and 445 of the Municipal Act, 2001 provide for a 
system of fines and other enforcement orders; and 
8. 
Section 434.1 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes a municipality to 
establish a system of administrative monetary penalties to assist the 
municipality in promoting compliance with its by-laws; and 
9. 
The Council of The Corporation of the Town of Lincoln has determined 
that it is desirable to enact a By-law to generally prohibit the Injury and 
Destruction of Protected Trees, and to allow for the Injury and 
Destruction of such Trees in limited circumstances with a Permit, and to 
encourage preservation and planting of Trees throughout the Town of Lincoln. 

Page 2 of 28 
 
 
10. 
The Town of Lincoln Committee of the Whole approved Report PD-19-
 25: Private Property Tree By-law Recommendation, on September 9, 
2025. 
 
NOW THEREFORE THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF THE CORPORATION OF 
THE TOWN OF LINCOLN ENACTS AS FOLLOWS: 
 
1. That the following definitions be included: 
 
1.1 “Administrative Penalty” means a monetary penalty administered 
pursuant to Town Bylaw No. 2024-51, as amended from time to time. 
1.2 “Agricultural Operation” has the same meaning as in the Farming and 
Food Production Protection Act, 1998, S.O. 1998, c. 1. 
1.3 "Agricultural Use" means the commercial production of crops and/or 
raising of livestock for human use and includes ploughing, seeding, 
Harvesting, leaving land fallow as part of a conventional rotational cycle, 
production of tree fruits and grapes, grazing, animal husbandry, and 
buildings and structures associated with these activities. 
1.4 "Applicant" means the owner or the owners authorized representative 
who, pursuant to this By-law, applies for a permit. 
1.5 "Application" means an application for the purpose of obtaining a permit. 
1.6 “Application Fee” means the fee in effect, amended from time to time, 
required in connection with the submission of an application. 
1.7 “Arborist” means an arborist qualified by the Ontario Ministry of 
Training, Colleges and Universities; a certified arborist with the 
International Society of Arboriculture; a consulting arborist registered 
with the American Society of Consulting Arborists; or a Registered 
Professional Forester as defined in the Professional Foresters Act, 
2000, S.O. 2000, c. 18. 
1.8 “Arborist Opinion” means a written statement prepared and signed by 
an Arborist that identifies the location, species, size, condition of Tree 
(health and structure; good, fair or poor), and describes the reason for 
removal or the maintenance strategies and measures to be taken to 
protect and preserve the Tree and space for future growth. 
1.9 "Boundary Tree" means a Tree having any part of its trunk located on 
the property line between adjoining lands, and for the purpose of this 
definition a ‘trunk’ means that part of the Tree from its point of growth 
away from its roots up to where it branches out to limbs and foliage. 
1.10 “Building Permit” means a building permit issued by the Town of Lincoln 
under the Building Code Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c.23, as amended. 
1.11 “Cash-in-lieu” funds that are collected instead of replanting trees. It 
should be noted that the Town of Lincoln may replant trees at their own 
discretion to public lands "Conservation Authority" has the same 
meaning as defined in the Conservation Authorities Act, R.S.O. 1990 

Page 3 of 28 
 
 
c.C.27. 
 
1.12 “Construction” 
means 
erection, 
alteration, 
repair, 
dismantling, 
demolition, structural maintenance, land clearing, earth moving, grading, 
excavating, laying of pipe and conduit (whether below or above ground 
level), street and highway building, application of concrete, equipment 
installation and alteration, and structural installation of construction 
components and materials, in any form or for any purpose. 
1.13 “Coppice Growth” means clump growth where more than one Tree stem 
grows from a single Tree stump and the Point of Measurement for such 
growth means that point on each stem measured immediately above 
the point of fusion, provided such point of fusion is less than 1.37 
metres above the highest point of undisturbed ground at the base of the 
coppice or clump growth. 
1.14 “Corporation” means a legal entity that is separate and distinct from its 
owners, created under the authority of law and typically formed by a 
group of people for the purpose of conducting business, managing 
assets, or pursuing specific activities. This excludes corporations that 
are single individuals acting as corporations, and instead refers to multi-
person, structured organizations such as business corporations, non-
profits, and municipal or public corporations. 
1.15 “Council” means the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Lincoln. 
1.16 “DBH” or “Diameter at Breast Height” means the diameter of the stem of 
a tree measured at a point that is 1.37 metres above the ground; 
1.17 “Dead Tree” means a Tree that as a result of any cause, is dead or, is 
in advanced and irreversible decline in health or condition. 
1.18 "Declared Emergency" means a situation or impending situation that 
has been declared an emergency under the Emergency Management 
and Civil Protection Act 
, R.S.O. 1990 c.E.9 or successor legislation; 
1.19 "Destroy" means to cut down, remove, uproot, unearth, topple, burn, 
bury, shatter, poison, or in any way cause a Tree to die or be killed, or 
where the extent of Injury caused to a live Tree or disturbance of any part 
of its Critical Root Zone is such that it is likely to die or be killed, 
excepting where a Tree and/or its roots are killed by natural causes. The 
terms "Destroyed" and "Destruction" shall have a corresponding 
meaning. 
1.20 "Diameter" means the diameter of the stem of a tree measured at a 
specified Point of Measurement with such measurement including the 
bark of the stem; 
1.21 "Director" means the Town’s Director of Planning and Development 
Services or any person appointed or otherwise delegated the authority 
of administration of this by- law. 
1.22 “Electronic Mail” means what is often referred to as e-mail, a form of 

Page 4 of 28 
 
 
communication including text and or image messages, sent over a 
public electronic communications network which can be stored until it is 
collected by the recipient. 
1.23 "Emergency Services" means the fire, police, ambulance or any 
Town services when responding to an emergency event. 
1.24 “Exemption Letter” means a letter provided by the Town confirming that 
Tree Injury or Destruction is exempt from this By-law. 
1.25 “Farmer” means a person who has a current and valid farm 
registration number under the Farm Registration and Farm Organizations 
Funding Act, 1993,S.O. 1993, c. 21, as amended; 
1.26 “Good Forestry Practices" means: 
(a) 
the proper implementation of harvest, renewal and maintenance 
activities known to be appropriate for the forest and 
environmental conditions under which they are being applied and 
that minimize detriments to forest values, including: significant 
ecosystems; important fish and Wildlife Habitat; soil and water 
quality and quantity; forest productivity and health; and the 
aesthetic and recreational opportunities of the landscape; 
(b) 
the cutting and removal of hazardous, severely damaged, 
diseased and insect- infested trees which must be removed in 
order to prevent contamination or infestation of other trees or 
because they no longer contribute to the achievement of forest 
values; 
(c) 
in the case of hazardous, damaged, diseased or insect-infested 
trees, the maintenance of a Woodland after the cutting and 
removal is completed unless it is determined through a report 
prepared by Qualified OPFA Member that trees must be 
removed and a Woodland would not be maintained; and, 
(d) 
the forestry management practices as set out in the Ministry of 
Natural Resources document “A Silvicultural Guide to Managing 
Southern Ontario Forests”; 
1.27 “Harvesting” means the Injury or Destruction of a Tree through cutting 
or other mechanized means. The term “Harvested” shall have a 
corresponding meaning; 
1.28 “Hazardous” means destabilized or structurally compromised to an 
extent that an imminent danger of death, injury or structural damage 
exists. 
1.29 “Heritage Tree” means a Tree having historical or community 
significance and designated by Council under Part IV of the Ontario 
Heritage Act (R.S.O. 1990, Chapter O.18); 
1.30 “Injury” or “Destruction” means to cut down, remove, uproot, unearth, 
topple, burn, bury, shatter, poison, or in any way cause a Tree to die or 
be killed, or where the extent of Injury caused to a live Tree or 
disturbance of any part of its Critical Root Zone is such that it is likely to 

Page 5 of 28 
 
 
die or be killed, excepting where a Tree and/or its roots are killed by 
natural causes. The terms “Injury”, “Injured”, “Injuring”, “Destroy”, 
“Destroying” or “Destroyed” shall have a corresponding meaning. 
1.31 “Natural Environment Area” means any geographic area of the Town 
designated as Natural Environment in the Lincoln Official Plan. 
1.32 “Normal Farm Practice” means a practice that is recognized by the 
Normal Farm Practices Board which is conducted in a manner 
consistent with proper and acceptable customs and standards, as 
established and followed by similar agricultural operations under similar 
circumstances, or makes use of innovative technology in a manner 
consistent with proper advanced farm management practices. 
1.33 “Officer” means a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer, a member of the 
Niagara Regional Police Service, a member of the Ontario Provincial 
Police and any other Provincial Offences Officer designated under the 
Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.33 (“Provincial Offences 
Act”) or any person appointed or otherwise delegated the authority of 
enforcement of this by-law. 
1.34 “Official Plan” means the Official Plan of the Town of Lincoln. 
1.35 “Order” means an Order to Discontinue Activity or an Order to Comply. 
1.36 “Owner” or “Property Owner” means the registered owner of a property. 
1.37 “Permit Holder” means the person to whom a Permit has been issued. 
1.38 “Permit” means a permit to Injure or Destroy Trees issued under this By-
law; 
1.39 “Person” means an individual or a corporation and their respective 
heirs, executors, administrators or other duly appointed representatives; 
1.40 “Personal Use” means use that does not include a commercial sale, 
exchange or other disposition of Trees Injured or Destroyed. 
1.41 "Point of Measurement" means the point on a Tree trunk measured 
above the highest point at which the ground meets the Tree. For Coppice 
Growth the point of measurement shall be at the point on the Tree trunk 
where the Tree stems separate provided that such point of separation is 
less than 1.37 metres from where the ground meets the Tree. 
1.42 “Pre-Consultation Meeting” means a meeting held between the Town 
and a Property Owner or their designate where information is provided 
regarding a proposed development and the Town has issued a formal 
agreement 
1.43 “Property” means any land or premises within the Town. 
1.44 “Pruning” means the removal of live or dead branches from a tree. 
1.45 “Qualified OPFA Member” means a Registered Professional Forester or 
Associate Member of the Ontario Professional Foresters Association 
under the Professional Foresters Act 2000, c.18, as amended, certified 
to practice professional forestry, unless a suspension, term, condition or 
limitation of certification applies which would restrict the Member from 

Page 6 of 28 
 
 
carrying out responsibilities under this By-law; 
1.46 “Qualified Person” means a person who, in the opinion of the Director, 
has satisfactory qualifications, experience, education or knowledge to 
be an expert in the matter. 
1.47 “Qualified Tree Marker” means: An individual who is currently certified 
 through the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources Certified Tree 
 Marker Program; or 
(a) 
A Qualified OPFA Member qualified to do tree marking. 
1.48 “Region” means The Regional Municipality of Niagara. 
1.49 “Replacement Tree” means a Tree of a size and type determined by the 
Town that is required to be planted to replace a Tree Destroyed or 
Injured pursuant to a Permit. 
1.50 “Security” means a financial deposit in a form of a irrevocable letter of 
credit or other type(s) of financial security acceptable to the Town from 
a financial institution to specify and submit a sum of money to the Town 
as determined by the Director as a condition of a Permit. 
1.51 “Site” means the Property where activities subject to this By-law are 
planned or executed, and in the case of a tract of land that extends over 
multiple landholdings, each separate landholding is a separate “Site.” 
1.52 “Town” means The Corporation of the Town of Lincoln or the geographic 
area of the municipality, as the context requires. 
1.53 "Tree" or “Trees” means any living species of woody perennial plant, 
including its root system, which has reached or can reach a height of at 
least 4.5 meters at physiological maturity; 
1.54 “Tree Preservation Plan” means a plan, prepared by a Qualified OPFA 
Member or Certified Arborist, for the purpose of protecting and 
preserving trees on properties where development or disturbance of the 
natural forest cover is to occur; 
1.55 “Urban Boundary” means the Urban Area Boundary as shown on 
Schedule A of the Town’s Official Plan. 
1.56 "Woodland" or “Woodlands” as defined by the Niagara Region 
Woodland Conservation By-law No. 2020-79, or any successor by-law 
for the regulation of injury or destruction of Trees in Woodlands in the 
Niagara Region, means land on one or more properties with a density of 
at least: 
(a) 
1,000 Trees, of any size, per hectare; or 
(b) 
750 Trees, measuring over five (5) centimetres in Diameter at 
DBH, per hectare; or 
(c) 
500 Trees, measuring over twelve (12) centimetres, in Diameter 
at DBH, per hectare; or 
(d) 
250 Trees, measuring over twenty (20) centimetres, in Diameter 
at DBH, per hectare; 

Page 7 of 28 
 
 
But does not include: 
(e) 
cultivated fruit or nut orchard; 
(f) 
a plantation established for the purpose of producing Christmas 
Trees and which is being actively managed and Harvested for the 
purposes for which it was planted, except that this does not refer to 
plantations that have ceased being managed or Harvested for their 
intended purpose for a period of 15 years or more; or 
(g) 
a bona fide Tree nursery that is being actively managed and 
Harvested for the purposes for which it was planted; 
(h) 
a hedgerow or windrow less than 20 meters in width. 
1.57 "Zoning By-law" means the Town’s Zoning By-law. 
 
2. SCOPE 
This By-law shall apply: 
2.1 To public Property in the Town as follows: 
(a) 
To Trees of any size 
 
2.2 To private Property in the Town as follows: 
(a) 
To Trees of any size within the Natural Environment Area; 
(b) 
To Trees greater than or equal to 15cm DBH within the Urban Area 
of the Town; 
(c) 
To Trees of any size designated as a Heritage Tree under Part IV 
or Part V of the Ontario Heritage Act; 
(d) 
To Trees of any size located on lands upon which there is pending 
an application for a plan of subdivision, a plan of condominium, a 
severance or consent, an Official Plan amendment, a Zoning 
Bylaw amendment, a minor variance, or a site plan approval; 
(e) 
To Trees of any size located on lands upon which there has been 
a Pre- Consultation meeting held with the Town for a plan of 
subdivision, a plan of condominium, a severance or consent, an 
Official Plan amendment, a Zoning By-law amendment, a minor 
variance, or a site plan approval and the Pre- consultation Meeting 
was held no more than eighteen months prior; 
(f) 
To Trees of any size identified as a Tree in a Tree Preservation 
Plan submitted as part of a development application; 
(g) 
To Replacement Trees planted as a requirement of a permit issued 
under the By-law. 
 
2.3 This By-law is a Designated By-law under the Administrative 
Penalties for Non- Parking Violations By-law No. 
 
 

Page 8 of 28 
 
 
3. EXCEPTIONS 
 3.1  Despite Section 2 of this By-law, this By-law does not apply to: 
(a) Section 135 (12) of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.25, 
exempts the following activities from the prohibitions of this By-law: 
Activities or matters undertaken by the Town or a local board of the 
Town; 
(b) Activities or matters undertaken under a licence issued under the 
Crown Forest Sustainability Act, 1994; 
(c) The injuring or destruction of Trees by a person licensed under the 
Surveyors Act to engage in the practice of cadastral surveying or his 
or her agent, while making a survey; 
(d) The injuring or destruction of Trees by a transmitter or distributor, as 
those terms are defined in section 2 of the Electricity Act, 1998, for 
the purpose of constructing and maintaining a transmission system 
or a distribution system, as those terms are defined in that section; 
(e) The Injuring or Destruction of Trees undertaken on land described 
in a licence for a pit or quarry or a permit for a wayside pit or 
wayside quarry issued under the Aggregate Resources Act; R.S.O 
1990, c. A.8, as amended; 
(f) 
The Injuring or Destruction of Trees undertaken on land in order to 
lawfully establish and operate or enlarge any pit or quarry on land: 
i. that has not been designated under the Aggregate  
 
 
Resources Act or a predecessor of that Act; and 
ii. on which a pit or quarry is a permitted land use under a by-     
 
 
law passed under Section 34 of the Planning Act 
(g) The Injuring or Destruction of Trees for the purpose of satisfying a 
condition to the approval of a site plan, a plan of subdivision, a plan 
of condominium, or a consent under sections 41, 51, and 53 of the 
Planning Act, or as a requirement of a site plan or subdivision 
agreement under those sections of the Act; or as a condition to a 
development permit authorized by regulation made under Section 
23(b) of the Niagara Escarpment Planning and Development Act, 
R.S.O 1990, c. N.2, as amended; 
 
3.2 In addition to the exceptions prescribed in Section 3.1, the provisions of 
this By- law do not apply to the following activities: 
 
(a) 
Injury or Destruction of a Tree with a diameter less than fifteen 
(15) centimeters at Diameter Breast Height, with the exception of 
trees located on lands upon which there has been and Pre-
Consultation Meeting held or a development application 
submitted, in accordance with Subsections 
2.2 d, e and f herein; 
(b) 
Injury or Destruction of a Tree that is located within a building, a 
solarium, rooftop gardens, actively managed cultivated orchard, 

Page 9 of 28 
 
 
Tree farm or plant nursery; 
(c) 
Woodlands 0.5 ha in size or larger as defined by the Niagara 
Region Woodland Conservation By-law No. 2020-79, or any 
successor by-law, regulating the injury or destruction of Trees in 
Woodlands in the Niagara Region; the Injuring or Destruction of 
Trees undertaken by a Conservation Authority on its own lands or 
in response to a Declared Emergency 
(d) 
the Injuring or Destruction of Trees at the direction of  
Emergency Services 
(e) 
the Injuring or Destruction of Trees that are a noxious weed as 
defined in the Weed Control Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. W.5 if the Injury 
or Destruction is being controlled by an appropriate method under 
the oversight or direction of a Qualified Person, as determined by 
the Director, and no Trees other than a noxious weed are being 
Injured or Destroyed; 
(f) 
Pruning that is necessary to maintain the health and condition of 
the Tree and is carried out in accordance with Good 
Arboricultural Practices 
(g) 
Injury or Destruction of a Tree that is an immediate threat to 
health or safety. Where emergency tree removal is required, 
where the likelihood of tree failure is imminent and a tree or part of 
a tree poses an extreme risk in which there is a high likelihood of 
severe consequences, the owner shall notify the Town as soon 
as may be practicable with documentation including but not 
limited to an arborist opinion, if available, and photographs of the 
size/height of the tree and distance to building; 
(h) 
Injury or Destruction of the Tree that is required by an Order 
made under the Town’s Property Standards By-law 2016-27, as 
amended or replaced, and issued under the Building Code Act 
(i) 
A Tree on lands operated by a railway 
(j) 
Where a Property Standards Order or Lot Maintenance Order 
has been issued by an Officer for the removal of a Hazardous 
Tree. 
(k) 
The Harvesting, Injuring or Destruction of Trees by a Farmer that 
involves the clearing of Trees for Agricultural Use on land that is 
owned by the Farmer doing the clearing and is part of a farm 
operation or farm corporation that has existed for at least three (3) 
years prior to such clearing. 
The clearing shall be carried out in accordance with Normal Farm 
Practices as defined in the Farming and Food Production 
Protection Act, 1998, S.O. 1998, 
c. 1, as amended, provided that: 
 
i. 
the land that is cleared is put into Agricultural Use within 
three (3) years of the date on which such clearing 

Page 10 of 28 
 
 
commences; 
ii. 
the land being cleared for Agricultural Use is outside the 
Urban Areas as defined in the Official Plan, and is 
designated and zoned for Agricultural Use in the Official 
Plan and Zoning By-law and, where applicable, in the 
Niagara Escarpment Plan; 
 
4. 
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS 
 
4.1 
Subject to Section 3.0 and Section 7.0 herein, no Person shall Injure or 
Destroy a Tree, or cause or permit the Injury or Destruction of a Tree, 
where the Tree is applicable under Subsection 2.1 or 2.2 herein, without 
first obtaining a Permit or Exemption Letter pursuant to this By-law. 
 
4.2 No Person shall fail to protect a Tree in accordance with all conditions 
of a Permit. 
4.3 No Person shall fail to comply with all terms and conditions of a Permit. 
4.4 No Person shall fail to protect a Tree marked for preservation on an 
approved Tree Protection Plan submitted as part of a plan of 
subdivision, a plan of condominium, a severance or consent, an Official 
Plan amendment, a Zoning Bylaw amendment, a minor variance, or a 
site plan approval. 
4.5 No Person shall fail to comply with an Order issued under this By-Law. 
4.6 No Person shall provide false or misleading information on an 
Application. 
4.7 No Person shall remove an Order that has been posted to the affected 
land(s) without approval from the issuing Officer. 
4.8 No Person shall fail to notify the Town within 48 hours of the change of 
registered Ownership of the property within 1 year of when a permit has 
been issued. 
4.9 No Person shall obstruct or interfere, or attempt to obstruct or interfere, 
with an Officer or any person or agent authorized by the Town in the 
discharge of their duties under this By-law. Such action shall be 
considered a violation of this By- law. 
4.10 No Person shall fail to replant a replacement tree or pay cash-in-lieu as 
directed in an order or permit condition. 
4.11 No Person shall tamper with a tree stump or remove a tree stump of a 
regulated tree without a permit. Any measurements will be based on the 
maximum size and requirements for compensation. 
 
5. 
EXEMPTIONS 
Despite Section 4, a Permit is not required under this By-law for the 
following activities provided that a written Exemption Letter is provided 

Page 11 of 28 
 
 
by the Town: 
5.1 Trees which are identified as dead, terminally diseased, or pose a 
hazard to human safety or property, where any of the following grounds 
for the proposed Tree Injury or Destruction Apply: 
(a) 
an Arborist or Registered Professional Forester’s inspection and 
written opinion that the Tree is dead, terminally diseased, and/or 
unsafe, and supported by rationale; 
(b) 
an Arborist’s, Professional Engineer’s or Insurance Loss Adjuster’s 
written opinion that the Tree is causing or is likely to cause 
structural damage to a drain, load-bearing structures or roof 
structures; and 
(c) 
a “qualified person’s” (as defined in the Environmental Protection 
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. E.19) written opinion that Tree removal is 
required to remediate contaminated soil. 
5.2 The Injuring or Destruction of Tree species identified classified as 
prohibited or restricted as defined in the Ontario Invasive Species Act, 
2015, S.O. 2015, c. 22, under O. Reg. 354/16, as amended. 
 
5.3 The Injuring or Destruction of Nuisance Tree species as defined in 
Schedule A of this By-law. This exemption does not apply to lands 
upon which there has been a pre-consultation or a pending application 
for a plan of subdivision, a plan of condominium, a severance or consent, 
an Official Plan amendment, a Zoning Bylaw amendment, a minor 
variance, or a site plan approval. 
5.4 The Injuring or Destruction of a Tree where the Tree is located within the 
dripline of an existing building or structure, and its removal is necessary 
for maintenance, repair, or reasonable use of the property. 
5.5 A Qualified Person’s written opinion that Tree removal is required to 
install, provide or maintain utilities, including but not limited to water or 
sanitary wastewater infrastructure, electricity, telecommunications, gas, 
or private waste disposal systems required for the use of a building or 
structure, and that there is no reasonable alternative for relocating 
those utilities or infrastructure. 
5.6 The Injuring or Destruction of a Tree that is required for the construction, 
repair, or maintenance of drainage works under the Drainage Act, 
R.S.O. 1990, c. D.17, as amended. 
5.7 The Injuring or Destruction of a Tree that is required to install, provide, 
or maintain a driveway or other access point that allows for sufficient 
and safe vehicular access to a building, structure, or use, where a 
Building permit has been issued or where access is otherwise legally 
required, provided that all reasonable alternatives and design options 
have been explored to minimize or avoid impacts to a Tree. 
 
6. 
APPLICATION FOR PERMITS 

Page 12 of 28 
 
 
6.1 If an Owner wishes to Destroy or Injure one or more of the Owner's 
Trees or wishes to undertake an activity which may Destroy or lnjure 
one or more of the Owner's Trees, and if none of the exceptions set out 
in Section 3 of this By-law are applicable, the Owner shall submit an 
Application for approval by the Town. 
6.2 Applications for Permits will only be processed if: 
(a) 
The application form has been completed in full, duly signed and 
submitted to the Town; 
(b) 
Payment of a non-refundable fee is provided as set out in the rates 
and fees schedule approved by Council, as applicable; and 
(c) 
The supporting documents that must be submitted with the application 
have been provided, including: 
i. An Arborist Opinion, if determined to be needed by the Director; 
ii. Photo(s) of the site and trees affected; 
iii. Site Plan or aerial image of the property marking trees 
proposed to be removed; and 
6.3 Reason for the proposed Tree Injury or Destruction For all instances 
where three or more Trees are proposed for removal, as part of the 
application for a Permit the Director will require additional supporting 
materials, including but not limited to: 
i. 
a Tree Preservation Plan; 
ii. 
a Tree Replacement or Landscape Plan 
6.4 Where the Tree is a Boundary Tree, the Applicant must provide the 
written consent of the other Owner. 
6.5 An Application that does not meet the requirements will not be 
processed or approved and will be returned to the Applicant within 30 
days. 
 
6.6 Applicants for a Permit should refer to Sections 7 and 8 of this By-law, 
as Permits are only issued for the grounds set out in Section 7 (and 
subject to all applicable requirements in this By-law including sufficient 
evidence of the grounds) for the Injury or Destruction of a Tree. 
 
6.7 
If an applicant does not provide all the documentation required by the 
Designated Official within the timeframe as may be specified by the 
Designated Official, or if the application is one (1) year old and the 
applicant has not taken any action to provide the Designated Official 
with all the documentation in the last four (4) months, the applicant shall 
be deemed to have withdrawn their application and shall not be entitled 
to any refunds of any payments made. The Designated Official may 
close the application file when the applicant withdraws or is deemed to 
have withdrawn the application. 
 
7. PERMIT ISSUANCE 

Page 13 of 28 
 
 
A permit shall be issued when all of the following are satisfied: 
7.1 
The Application is complete and fee has been paid to the Town; 
7.2 
The Town is satisfied that one or more of the following grounds 
for permit issuance apply: 
(a) 
based upon the opinion of an Arborist and/or a Registered 
Professional Forester, the Tree Injury or Destruction represents 
Good Arboricultural Practices and/or Good Forestry Practices; 
(b) 
based on the opinion of a Qualified Person, the Tree Injury or 
Destruction is required to install, provide or maintain utilities, 
water or sanitary wastewater infrastructure required for the 
construction or use of a building or structure for which a Building 
Permit has been issued with no reasonable alternative to locating 
those utilities or infrastructure; 
(c) 
based on the opinion of a Qualified Person, the Tree or Trees are 
causing or are likely to cause structural damage to a drain, load-
bearing structures or roof structures; 
(d) 
the Tree Injury or Destruction is required pursuant to a Building 
Permit and the Town is satisfied that there are no reasonable 
alternatives to the Tree Injury or Destruction; 
(e) 
the Town is satisfied that there are no reasonable alternatives to 
the proposed Tree Injury or Destruction 
(f) 
the Town shall refuse to issue a permit if Section 7.1 and 7.2 
herein are not satisfied. 
 
8. 
PERMIT REFUSAL 
 
8.1 The Town may deny, revoke, suspend or impose a term and/or condition 
on a Permit on any one or more of the following grounds: 
 
(a) 
the Tree is an endangered species or threatened species as defined 
in the Endangered Species Act, 2007, S.O. 2007, c. 6, or the Species 
at Risk Act, 
S.C. 2002, c. 29; 
(b) 
the Tree is designated under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act, 
R.S.O. 1990, 
c. O.18; 
(c) 
if migratory birds are making use of the Tree, or migratory bird nests 
are in the Tree, as contemplated in the Migratory Birds Convention 
Act, 1994, S.C. 1994, 
c. 22, during the active nesting period as defined by the Government 
of Canada as Late March to Late August; 
(d) 
the protection and preservation of ecological systems and their 
functions, including the protection and preservation of native flora 
and fauna; 

Page 14 of 28 
 
 
(e) 
erosion, flood control and sedimentation of watercourses; 
(f) 
any information contained in the Application form or any other 
information provided to the Town is inaccurate or incomplete; 
(g) 
the Applicant, Owner or any Person working under the authority of 
the Owner fails to comply with any condition of the Permit or this By-
law; 
(h) 
the Applicant, Owner or any Person acting under the authority of the 
Owner is carrying on activities that are in contravention of this By-
law; 
(i) 
there are reasonable grounds to believe that an Application or other 
documents provided to the Town by or on behalf of the Property 
Owner contains a false statement; 
(j) 
An application for rezoning, a consent, a minor variance, a plan of 
subdivision or a site plan to the land on which the Tree(s) is located 
has been submitted to the Town, but has not received final approval; 
(k) 
Issuance of a permit pursuant to the Niagara Region Woodland 
Conservation By-Law is required 
(l) 
an Application is inconsistent with an approved Tree Protection Plan. 
(m) the Permit was issued in error; 
(n) 
the Owner requests, in writing, that it be revoked; 
(o) 
the Permit is still valid, but there has been a change in the Legal 
Ownership of the land; and 
(p) 
 the Town is satisfied that there is a material change in 
circumstances in connection with or on the Site and the Town is 
satisfied that the Permit needs to be revoked to avoid further Injury or 
Destruction of a Tree or Trees. 
8.2 When denying a Permit, the Director shall notify the Applicant in writing 
and provide reasons for their decision to the Applicant. 
 
9. PERMIT CONDITIONS 
9.1 Every Permit that is issued is subject to the following conditions 
determined by the Director, all of which shall be performed and 
observed by the Permit Holder: 
(a) the requirement for the planting of Replacement Tree(s) in 
accordance with Schedule “B” or as may otherwise be determined 
appropriate by the Town having regard for the existing canopy 
coverage on the subject site; 
(b) the Permit Holder shall ensure that the number of Replacement 
Trees, and the species, or choice of species, size and location of 
Replacement Trees, are planted on the same Site by the date 
specified on the Permit; 
(c) 
the Director may permit, where there is insufficient space on the 
same Site to plant all the Replacement Trees, the Permit Holder to 

Page 15 of 28 
 
 
plant as many Replacement Trees the Site will allow and the Permit 
Holder shall either plant the remaining Replacement Trees at another 
suitable location to the satisfaction of the Director and/or forthwith 
pay the fee in Schedule “C” with respect to the number of 
Replacement Trees that could not be planted due to insufficient 
space (Fee for Off-Site Tree Planting); 
(d) 
The minimum tree replacement size is a 30 mm caliper deciduous tree, 
or a one hundred and fifty (150) centimetre height coniferous tree in a 5-
gallon container or balled and burlapped or in a wire basket; and 
(e) 
Where three or more Trees are proposed for removal, security be 
delivered to the Town to cover the costs per Replacement Tree(s) to 
be planted at a dollar amount equivalent to the Town’s cash in lieu of 
tree planting fee. The security deposit will be refunded once the final 
inspection of the replacement planting is complete. For development 
applications, the security deposit shall be held for a two-year 
maintenance period. 
9.2 Notwithstanding any other provision of this By-law, the Director may 
impose terms and conditions on any Permit at issuance or at any time 
during the term of the Permit, including special conditions which can 
include, but are not limited to: 
(a) 
the manner and timing in which Injuring or Destruction is to occur. 
(b) 
the species, size, number and location of Trees to be Injured or 
Destroyed or to be planted; 
(c) 
the marking of trees to be cut with paint; 
(d) 
the forthcoming submission of additional information required 
before the permit comes into effect; 
(e) 
measures to be implemented to mitigate the direct and indirect 
effects of the Tree Injury or Destruction; 
(f) 
where Trees are proposed to be retained, and where an Arborist 
Opinion is required, identifying the location, species and size of Trees on 
the property and a Tree Protection Plan, including but not limited to barriers 
and hoarding for the purpose of avoiding the Injuring or Destruction of the 
Trees that are to be retained; 
(g) 
where there is a discrepancy in the health assessment regarding the 
condition of the Tree to be Injured or Destroyed, and where the Town 
so requires, a written evaluation by an Arborist of the condition of the 
Tree; and 
(h) 
a condition recommended by a Qualified Person that the Town 
determines is appropriate. 
9.3 A Permit Holder shall ensure that the permit is securely posted on the 
property from which the trees are to be removed, in a location visible 
from the street at least two 
(2) days prior to the tree removal being undertaken. 
9.4 A Permit issued under this By-law shall be valid only for the period of 

Page 16 of 28 
 
 
time for which it is issued and shall not be transferable to another site. 
Unless expressly stated on the face of the Permit, all Permits issued 
under this By-law shall expire 12 months after issuance. 
9.5 A Permit shall expire upon the transfer of ownership of the site unless 
the new Owner provides written commitment to comply with all 
conditions under which the permit was issued, prior to transfer of the 
site, including in particular, compliance with this By-law, and to provide 
security in a form and amount acceptable to the Director, at which time 
any security previously provided by the original permit holder pursuant 
to this By-law shall be released. 
9.6 A Permit may be renewed by the Director for up to two (2) additional one 
(1) year terms contiguous with the expiry date of the original Permit and 
after a written request from the Owner for renewal is made to the 
Director, who must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for the 
renewal. 
9.7 Where an Owner requests a material change to a plan, specification, 
document or other information following the issuance of a permit, the 
Director may require payment of one-half of the original permit fee and 
submission of revised documentation, which shall be approved by the 
Director prior to any continued work. 
9.8 Where a permit has been issued, an Applicant or Authorized Agent shall 
request the Director to make inspections at the commencement and 
completion of the work and shall request such further inspections as may 
be required by the Director or the conditions of the permit. 
9.9 A Permit issued under the By-law does not relieve the Owner of any 
other applicable municipal, provincial, or federal by-laws, regulations or 
requirements. 
 
10. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PERMIT HOLDER: 
The Permit Holder shall: 
a) 
Pay all fees associated with this By-Law. 
b) 
Ensure that they remain in compliance with applicable law(s), 
including but not limited to the Migratory Birds Convention Act, 1994, 
and the Endangered Species Act, 2007; the Environmental Protection 
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. the Ontario Heritage Act, R. S. 0. c. 0.18, zoning 
or land use by-laws, the Building Code Act, S. 0. 1992 c. 23, the 
Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13, Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, c. 25, the 
Drainage Act, R.S.O. c. and the Federal Fisheries Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. F-14 
and where such acts or by-laws require approval such approval is obtained, 
and proof submitted or will be obtained and submitted before the work 
under the permit is carried out; 
c) 
Meet all of the conditions of the Permit; 
d) 
Ensure that the Permit is posted in a public location for a time 
period before, during and after the Tree Injury or Destruction; 
e) 
Ensure that measures are implemented to protect any retained Trees; 

Page 17 of 28 
 
 
f) 
Ensure that the Town of Lincoln is notified within 48 hours of change 
registered Ownership of the property; 
g) 
Ensure the posting of Security, that the Town of Lincoln may draw 
upon in full if the By-Law is contravened or if there is a failure in the 
proper, complete execution of a Permit and its conditions and the 
Town has to restore all or part of the property; 
h) 
Ensure they comply with any requirements to protect or relocate 
wildlife; 
i) 
Ensure they implement any measures outlined within an Arborist 
Opinion submitted with the Application within a period of time 
specified by the Town of Lincoln; and 
j) 
That the applicant, if required by the Director, has entered into an 
agreement of this By-law, and has agreed to perform all the 
required obligations under the agreement prior to the issuance of 
the Permit. 
 
11. ENFORCEMENT 
 
11.1 The administration and enforcement of this By-law shall be performed 
by the Town and those persons designated as Officers under this By-
law or as may be designated for the purposes of this By-law under other 
by-laws of the Town. No Person shall hinder, obstruct, or attempt to 
hinder or obstruct any person exercising a power or performing a duty 
under this By-law or under the Municipal Act provisions relevant to this 
By-law. 
11.2 An Officer may enter onto lands, including private property, at any 
reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an inspection to 
determine if this By-law, including conditions of a permit, has been 
complied with. 
 
12. ORDER TO DISCONTINUE ACTIVITY 
12.1 Where an Officer or the Director is satisfied that a contravention of this 
By-law has occurred and in the opinion of the Officer or Director the 
work has occurred within a reasonable amount of time of the inspection 
where a contravention is observed, the Officer or Director may make an 
Order requiring the owner of the land or the Person who caused a 
contravention of this By-law to discontinue the activity, and the Order 
shall set out: 
 
(a) The municipal address or the legal description of the land; 
 
 
(b) Reasonable particulars of the contravention; and 
 
(c) the period within which there must be compliance. 
 

Page 18 of 28 
 
 
12.2 Service of Order to Discontinue: An Order made under Subsection 12.1 
may be served personally or by registered mail to the Owner's or 
Person’s last known address, by electronic mail to the last known 
address, and in the event such service is not possible, may be given by 
posting a placard on the property in the manner provided for in 
Subsection 12.1. 
 
12.3 The officer shall post the Order containing the terms of the Order on the 
affected lands. The placing of the Order shall be deemed to be 
sufficient and immediate service of the Order on the Person to whom the 
Order is directed. The Oder shall not be removed without the approval of 
the Officer. 
12.4 Where service of the order is made by registered mail, service shall be 
deemed to have been served on the fifth (5th) day from the date such 
notice was mailed. 
 
13. ORDER TO COMPLY 
 
13.1 Where an Officer or the Director is satisfied a contravention of the By-
law has occurred within a reasonable amount of time of the inspection, 
the Officer or the Director may issue an Order to Comply requiring the 
property owner to rehabilitate the land to the lands state prior to work 
being commenced, or to plant, replant or replace and trees. 
13.2 
The Order to Comply shall include: 
(a) 
The name of the property owner and the municipal address or 
the legal description of the land; 
(b) 
Reasonable particulars of the contravention. 
(c) 
The work to be done and the period within which there must 
be compliance with the Order; and, 
(d) 
A statement that if the work is not done in compliance with the 
Order within the period it specifies, the Town may have the 
work done at the expense of the owner, and 
(e) 
Contact information of the Officer. 
13.3 The Order may be served in accordance with the service provisions 
contained in Sections 12.2, 12.3, 12.4 
13.4 If a Person fails to comply with an Order to Comply issued pursuant to 
this section, the Town may enter onto the land(s) at any reasonable 
time for the purposes of carrying out an inspection or commencing 
rehabilitation of the land described in the Order, at the Owners 
expense. 
13.5 If the Town enters onto the land(s) and completes the work, the Town 
may recover its costs by adding the costs to the Registered Owners tax 
roll and collecting them in the same manner as taxes. 
13.6 Should the owner fail to do work required under this By-law, after the 

Page 19 of 28 
 
 
Town has served an Order requiring compliance and the time for 
compliance provided has expired, in addition to any other action the 
Town may take or other remedy it may have, the Town may at any 
reasonable time and at the owner's expense, in the manner provided for 
in the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.25 including interest at the rate 
specified there, and using any security supplied, carry out repairs on the 
property as follows: 
(a) Where the Town holds security to carry out the repairs, the Town 
may carry out such repairs as are necessary to bring the property 
into compliance up to the amount of the security held; 
(b) Where the Town does not hold security or the amount of security  
under (a) is insufficient to complete the repairs, the Town may 
carry out such repairs as are necessary to bring the property into 
compliance with the cost, subject to (c), not to exceed $10,000 
excluding interest accrued; and 
(c) Where the costs of bringing the property into compliance 
exceeds the amounts authorized by (a) or (b), the Town may 
carry out such repairs to an amount or manner as may be 
approved by Council. 
13.7 Upon application for issuance of a Permit, the property owner shall 
permit entry and inspection of the site at all reasonable times, to take fill 
samples for the purpose of determining whether material used for fill, 
includes only soil, stone, sod or other material acceptable to the 
Director and such material is clean and free of any glass, plastics, 
rubber, metals, termites, liquid, garbage or contaminants or to inspect, 
identify species, count and/or measure any tree(s) that may have been 
destroyed or are specified under a permit or application scheduled to be 
destroyed. For purposes of an inspection under this section the Director 
may: 
(a) Alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or 
expert knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples, 
measure trees and assess injury or damage, photographs 
necessary for the purposes of the inspection; 
(b) Order the owner of the property to take and supply at the owner's 
expense such tests, samples, tree counts, health, identification of 
species or measurements as are specified in the Order; and 
(c) Require the owner to provide mandatory third-party testing of fill 
material, where the amount of fill to be dumped exceeds 100 
cubic metres or provide mandatory third-party reports regarding 
tree counts, health and/or measurements 
13.8 Costs incurred by the Town under this By-law may be registered as a 
lien on the land upon the registration in the proper land registry office of 
a notice of lien or the Town may recover all costs associated with any 
requested testing or soils or other material, work or condition failed to be 
met on a permit or Order by applying those cost to the Property Tax Roll. 
13.9 A Permit shall be revoked where it is discovered that it was issued as a 

Page 20 of 28 
 
 
result of misleading or false information supplied by the applicant or 
owner, where it has been issued in error, where non-compliance with a 
Town Order has occurred or any other reason the Director determines 
as reasonable. 
13.10 
Where a Permit has been revoked under this subsection or for any 
other reason under this By-law, the Permit holder shall forthwith cease 
all work under the revoked Permit. 
 
14. 
OFFENCES AND PENALTY 
 
14.1 All contraventions of this By-law or orders issued under this By-law are 
designated multiple and continuing offences pursuant to section 429(2) 
of the Municipal Act, 2001. 
14.2 Offence: Every Person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is 
guilty of an offence and upon conviction is liable to such penalties as 
provided for in the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.33 and 
the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25. 
14.3 Administrative Penalties: An Officer who finds that a Person has 
contravened a provision of this By-law may issue a penalty notice 
pursuant to the Non-Parking Administrative Monetary Penalty System 
By-law No. 2024-51 as amended or replaced from time to time, 
imposing an Administrative Penalty in the amount as established in 
Schedule “C” to this By-law.  
14.4 Continuing Offence: A contravention of the requirements set out in this 
By-law is deemed to be a continuing offence on each day or part of a 
day that the contravention continues. 
14.5 An Officer who finds or has reasonable cause to believe that a Person 
has contravened any provision of this By-law, including any Schedules, 
may issue a penalty notice to the Person. 
14.6 Each person who has been issued a penalty notice shall, upon 
issuance of the penalty notice, be liable to pay an Administrative 
Monetary Penalty to the Town. 
a) If an Officer has issued a penalty notice under subsection 10.3 of this By-
law and has reasonable cause to believe that the same Person has 
contravened the same provisions of this By-law, including any 
Schedules, for a second time within twenty-four (24) months of the date 
the first penalty notice is deemed to be served, the Officer may issue a 
second penalty notice to the Person. 
14.7 Upon issuance of the second penalty notice, the Person shall be liable 
to pay an administrative penalty to the Town in accordance with the 
Non-Parking Administrative Penalty By-law 2024-51 as amended. 
14.8 If an Officer has issued a penalty notice under subsection 10.3 of this By-
law and has reasonable cause to believe that the same Person has 
contravened the same provision of this By-law, including any Schedules, 

Page 21 of 28 
 
 
for a third or subsequent time within twenty-four (24) months of the date 
the second penalty notice is deemed to be served, the Officer may 
issue a third or subsequent penalty notice to the Person. 
14.9 
 Upon issuance of a third or subsequent penalty notice, the Person 
shall be liable to pay an Administrative Monetary Penalty to the 
Town. 
14.10 A Person who has been issued a penalty notice under this By-law 
may request a review of the penalty notice in accordance with the 
Non-Parking AMPS By-law No. 2024-51 as amended from time to 
time. 
14.11 Any Person who contravenes any provision of this By-law, or an Order 
issued under Section 9 is guilty of an offence and is liable: 
(a) On first conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000 or $1,000 
per tree, whichever is greater; and 
(b) On any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than 
$25,000 or $2,500 per tree, whichever is greater. 
14.12 
Despite subsection 10.12, where the Person convicted is a 
corporation: 
(a) The maximum fines in clause 10.1(a) are $50,000 or $5,000 per 
tree 
(b) The maximum fines in clause 10.1(b) are $100,000 or $10,000 
per tree. 
14.13 If a Person is convicted of an offence for contravening this By-law or 
an Order issued under Section 9, the court in which the conviction has 
been entered, and any court of competent jurisdiction, thereafter, may 
Order the Person to rehabilitate the land or to plant or replant trees in 
such a manner and within such period as the court considers 
appropriate, including any silvicultural treatment necessary to re- 
establish the trees. 
 
15. ADMINSTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
15.1 This By-law shall be administered and enforced by the Town  
 
 
or any Person or Officers appointed to administer or enforce this 
By-  
law. 
15.2 An Officer may, for the purpose of enforcing this By-law,  exercise any 
 
power, authority or remedy granted to the Town  
pursuant 
to 
the 
 
Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25.  
15.3 An Officer may, at any reasonable time, enter upon and inspect any 
property to determine if this By-law is being complied with. 
15.4 For the purposes of an inspection under section 15.3 of this By-law, an 
Officer may require the production of documents or things relevant to 
the inspection, inspect and remove relevant documents or things for the 
purpose of making copies or extracts, require information from a Person 

Page 22 of 28 
 
 
concerning a matter related to the inspection and/ or tale photographs, 
samples, measurements as deemed necessary for the purpose of the 
inspection and may also include being accompanied by a person 
possessing special or expert knowledge. 
15.5 No Person shall fail to comply with an Order made under section 12.0 or 
13.0. 
15.6 Where any Person fails to comply with an Order made under section 
12.0 or 13.0 by the prescribed date, the Town may do any matter or 
thing necessary to bring the property into compliance with this By-law at 
the expense of the person in default of the Order. 
15.7 No Person shall obstruct or hinder or attempt to obstruct or hinder and 
Officer in the exercise of a power or the performance of a duty under 
this By-law. 
15.8 An Owner may appeal the denial or a permit, any condition imposed on 
the granting of a Permit or any decision of the Town arborist or Director 
under the provisions of this By-law to the Property Standards 
Committee. 
 
16. GENERAL 
16.1 In the event of a conflict between this By-law and the provision of another 
By-law, the provisions in this By-law shall prevail. 
16.2 Any reference to legislation or Municipal By-laws includes the legislation 
or By- law and any amendment, replacement, subsequent  enactment or 
consolidation of such legislation or By-law. 
16.3 The Clerk of the Town is authorized to affect any minor modifications, 
corrections or omissions, solely of an administration, numerical, 
grammatical, semantical or descriptive nature to this By- law 
or 
its 
schedules after the passage of this By-law.  
17. SEVERABILITY 
17.1 ln the event that any provision or part of this By-law is found to be 
invalid or unenforceable for any reason whatsoever, then the particular 
provision or part thereof shall be deemed to be severed from the 
remainder of the By-law and all other provisions or parts thereof shall 
remain in full force and shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent 
permitted by law. 
17.2 If any Section or part of this By-law is found by any court of competent 
jurisdiction to be illegal or beyond the power of Council to enact, such 
section or part shall be deemed to be severable and all other sections or 
parts thereof of this By-law shall be deemed to be separate and 
independent therefrom and to be enacted as such. 
 
 
 
18. FORCE AND EFFECT 

Page 23 of 28 
 
 
 
18.1 That the Private Property Tree Bylaw for the Town of Lincoln, to regulate         
  
 and prohibit the Injury or Destruction of Trees on private property, be 
  
 adopted. 
 
18.2 That this By-law shall apply to all private properties in the Town of  
  
 Lincoln’s urban areas. 
 
18.3 This By-law shall come into force and take effect on the date of its final 
  
 passing. 
 
 
                     PASSED AND ENACTED on the 22nd day of September 2025.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                
MAYOR: SANDRA EASTON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                               
CLERK: JULIE KIRKELOS 

Page 24 of 28 
 
 
 
Schedule ‘A’ to By-law 2025-40 
List of Nuisance Trees 
 Autumn Olive (Elaeagnus umbellate) 
 Black Locust (Robina pseudoacacia L.) 
 Common Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica) 
 Cottonwood *considered a Nuisance Tree only if located within 7 metres 
of a load bearing or roof structure 
 European Birch (Betula pendula) 
 European Black Alder (Alnus glutinosa) 
 Female Gingko 
 Glossy Buckthorn (Rhamnus frangula) 
 Manitoba Maple (Acer negundo) 
 Russian Olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia) 
 Saltcedar (Tamarix) 
 Siberian Elm (Ulmus pumila) 
 Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus altissima) 
 White Mulberry (Morus alba) 

Page 25 of 28 
 
 
 
Schedule ‘B’ to By-law 2025-40 
Replacement Tree Planting Requirements 
• The number of replacement trees required will be determined by the diameter 
at breast height (DBH) of the tree(s) proposed to be removed, as outlined in the 
chart below. 
 
DBH of Tree 
Proposed 
to be Removed 
or Destroyed 
Number of Replacement Trees 
Required 
15-19 cm 
1 
20-29 cm 
3 
30-49 cm 
4 
50-59 cm 
5 
≥ 60-69 cm 
6 
70-79 cm 
7 
>80 
8 
 
DBH refers to the tree diameter measured at 1.4 metres (140 cm) above 
the ground. 
• Replacement tree species shall be selected from the Town’s list of approved 
trees for planting. 
• The minimum tree replacement size is a 30 mm caliper deciduous tree, or a 
one hundred and fifty (150) centimeter height coniferous tree in a 5-gallon 
container or balled and burlapped or in a wire basket. 
• Where three or more Trees are proposed for removal, the Town will require 
security to be delivered to cover the costs per Replacement Tree(s) to be 
planted at a dollar amount equivalent to the Town’s cash in lieu of tree 
planting fee. The security deposit will be refunded once the final inspection of 
the replacement planting is complete. For development applications, the 
security deposit shall be held for the duration of the maintenance period. 

Page 26 of 28 
 
 
 
Schedule ‘C’ to By-law 2025-40 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE MONETARY PENALTY 
DESIGNATED BY-LAW PROVISIONS 
 
1. 
General 
 
1.1 
Column 1 in the following table lists the provisions within the corresponding 
by-law that are hereby designated for the purpose of establishing an 
Administrative Monetary Penalty System. 
 
1.2 
Column 2 in the following table sets out the short form wording to be used 
in a Penalty Infraction Notion for the contravention of the designated 
provisions listed in column 1. 
 
1.3 
Column 3 in the following table sets out the Administrative Monetary 
Penalty Tier 1 amounts that are payable for contraventions of the 
designated provisions listed in column 1. 
 
1.4 
Column 4 (“Administrative Penalty Tier 2”) sets out the Administrative 
Monetary Penalty amounts that are payable for a second (2nd) 
contravention of the designated provisions listed in Column 1 by the same 
Person(s) within a two (2) year period since the penalty notice was issued 
for the first (1st) contravention of the designated provision in Column 1. 
 
1.5 
Column 5 (“Administrative Penalty Tier 3”) sets out the Administrative 
Monetary Penalty amounts that are payable for a third (3rd), or greater, 
contravention of the designated provisions listed in Column 1 by the same 
Person(s) within a two (2) year period since the previous penalty notice 
was issued for the second (2nd), or greater, contravention of the of the 
designated provision in Column 1. 
 
ITE 
M 
COLUMN 
1 
Designate 
d 
Provision 
s 
COLUMN 2 
Short Form 
Wording 
COLUMN 3 
Administrati 
ve Penalty 
Tier 1 
COLUMN 4 
Administrati 
ve Penalty 
Tier 2 
COLUMN 5 
Administrati 
ve Penalty 
Tier 3 
1 
4.1 
Individual - 
Injure/Destroy/F 
$600 
$800 
$1000 

Page 27 of 28 
 
 
 
2 
4.1 
Corporation - 
Injure/ 
Destroy/fell tree 
with greater 
than 15cm DBH 
without permit 
$1500 
$1750 
$2000 
3 
4.11 
Individual -
Tampering with 
a tree stump to 
destroy 
evidence to 
Injure or Destroy 
a Tree without 
permit 
$600 
$800 
$1000 
4 
4.11 
Corporation-
Tampering with 
a tree stump to 
destroy 
evidence to 
Injure or Destroy 
a Tree without 
permit 
$1500 
$1750 
$2000 
5 
4.2, 4.3, 
4.4 
Fail to comply 
with conditions 
of a permit 
$200 
$400 
$600 
6 
4.2, 4.3, 
4.4 
Corporation - 
Fail to comply 
with conditions 
of a permit 
$500 
$750 
$1000 
7 
4.9; 11.2 
Obstruction of 
Director or 
Officer 
$1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 28 of 28 
 
 
Application Fees – for review and consideration 
(Not to be included in By-law – will be added to Fees By-law) 
 
Application Fees: 
$0 
No fee for dead, dying, diseased, nuisance trees 
(Tree Removal Permit Exemption Letter is Required – see 
Section 5 Exemptions) 
 
$50 
Individuals: Non-refundable fee for each tree removed, of at 
least 15 cm DBH, in a 12 month period 
 
$200 
Corporations: Non-refundable fee for each tree removed, of at 
least 15 cm DBH, in a 12 month period 
 
 
Additional Fees (if Applicable): 
$400 
Additional fee if work has already commenced 
 
$200 
Fee for each additional site inspection, if required 
 
Security Deposit (if Applicable): 
$250 per tree 
 
Individuals 
$550 per tree 
 
 
Corporations 
 
Tree replacement may be a condition of removal. The security 
deposit per replacement tree will be refunded once a final 
inspection of the replacement plantings is complete. 
 
 
Cash in Lieu of Tree Replanting (if Applicable): 
 
Cash-in-lieu of each tree replacement required, only when approved by the Town, 
where there is not sufficient space to replant on the subject property 
 
$250 per tree 
Individuals  
 
$550 per tree 
Corporations 
 
 
 

