THE CORPORATION OF THE COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX 
BY-LAW #7314 
 
 
A BY-LAW to Prohibit or Regulate the Destruction or Injuring of Trees. 
WHEREAS:  
A. 
Section 135 of the Municipal Act, R.S.O. 2001, c.25, (the “Municipal 
Act”), as amended or replaced, authorizes the Council of the County of 
Middlesex (the “County”) to enact a By-law to prohibit or regulate the 
destruction or injury of trees in woodlands; 
B. 
Council may require that a permit be obtained to injure or destroy trees in 
woodlands specified in the By-law and impose conditions on a permit, 
including conditions regarding the manner of destruction and the 
qualifications of persons authorized to injure or destroy trees; and 
C. 
Council has determined that it is desirable to enact such a By-law for the 
following purposes: the conservation and enhancement of the County’s 
woodlands; improvement of natural heritage and ecosystem functions; 
enhancement of forest integrity, diversity and resilience to pests and 
disease; maintenance and improvement of wildlife habitat; sustainable 
production of wood products; protection against floods, soil erosion, water 
supplies; and improvement of human health and quality of life. 
NOW THEREFORE the Council of The Corporation of the County of Middlesex 
enacts as follows: 
1. 
SHORT TITLE 
This By-Law may be cited as the “Woodlands By-Law”.  
2. 
INCORPORATION OF RECITALS 
The above recitals are hereby incorporated into this Woodlands By-law. 
3. 
DEFINITIONS 
In addition to terms defined in the incorporated recitals to this Woodlands 
By-law, the following terms have the following meanings in this Woodlands 
By-law; 
a) 
"AGS" (Acceptable Growing Stock) means trees suitable for 
retention in the stand for at least one (1) cutting cycle. They are 
trees of commercial species with the form and quality as to be 
saleable as sawlog products at a future date. The classification and 
designation of a Tree as AGS or UGS will follow principles and 
guidelines established in Section 5.3 of the technical guide "A 
Silvicultural Guide to Managing Southern Ontario Forests" (Ministry 
of Natural Resources, 2000). 
b) 
"Basal Area" means the area of the cross-section of a tree stem 
measured at a point 1.37 meters (4.5 ft.) above ground level at the 
base of the tree. For the purposes of this Woodlands By-law, Basal 
Area refers to trees within a Woodland with a minimum DBH 
(Diameter at Breast Height) of 10 cm, expressed in square meters 
per hectare (m²/ha). 

c) 
"Building Permit" means a permit issued under the Building Code 
Act, 1992, R.S.O. 1992, c.23, as amended or replaced. 
d) 
"Business Day" means any day from Monday to Friday, excluding 
statutory holidays recognized in the Province of Ontario, including, 
without limitation, New Year's Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, 
Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas 
Day, and Boxing Day. 
e) 
"Certified Tree Marker" means an individual holding full 
certification in good standing for tree marking under the Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources program, with demonstrated 
experience in marking according to Good Forestry Practices within 
Middlesex County. 
f) 
"Circumference" means the measurement of the perimeter or 
outer boundary of a tree’s stem or trunk, including the bark. 
g) 
"Committee" means the Committee of the Whole, a Standing 
Committee of County Council to which all matters related to 
woodlands are referred, as designated by the Standing Rules, 
Regulations, and/or By-laws of the County of Middlesex for 
consideration and reporting to County Council. 
h) 
"Conifer Plantation" means a Woodland where coniferous trees 
have been planted or seeded in a predetermined pattern. 
i) 
"Corridor" means a break in the forest cover or canopy, including 
but not limited to treed windbreaks, rights-of-way, or natural open 
spaces. 
j) 
"Coppice growth" means a tree with multiple stems emerging from 
the same root system and connected through a common trunk. For 
the purpose of assessing Basal Area, each stem that is separate 
from the others at a point 1.37 meters above the highest point of 
undisturbed ground at the base of the tree will be counted 
separately. 
k) 
"Council" means the Council of the Corporation of the County of 
Middlesex. 
l) 
“County Clerk" means the County Clerk of the Corporation of the 
County of Middlesex, or their designated representative. 
m) 
"Diameter" means the measurement of a tree’s stem diameter 
taken outside the bark at a specified point. 
n) 
"DBH" (Diameter at Breast Height) means the diameter of a tree’s 
stem measured at 1.37 meters (4.5 feet) above ground level. 
o) 
“Drip Line" means an imaginary line directly beneath the outermost 
branches of the trees that form the perimeter of the Woodlands. 
p) 
"Good Forestry Practices" means the proper implementation of 
harvest, renewal and maintenance activities known to be 
appropriate for the forest and environmental conditions under which 
they are being applied and that minimize detriments to forest values 
including significant ecosystems, important fish and wildlife habitat, 
soil and water quality and quantity, forest productivity and health 

and the aesthetics and recreational opportunities of the landscape; 
and 
Good Forestry Practices permits the destruction or injury of trees 
that: 
i) 
have been damaged by disease, insects, wind, ice, fire, 
lightning or other natural causes to an extent that the health 
of such trees is likely to deteriorate; 
ii) 
should be removed to prevent disease or insects from 
spreading to other trees; 
iii) 
are cut in accordance with the Provincial Silvicultural 
Guidelines as referred to in the Forest Operations and 
Silviculture Manual and its revisions prepared under the 
authority of the Crown Forest Sustainability Act, S.O . 1994, 
c. 25. 
iv) 
are marked and cut as part of a Woodlands Management 
Plan by way of a "prescription" approved by a Registered 
Professional Forester or Associate Member in good 
standing. 
q) 
“Harvest” means to destroy a tree.  
r) 
“Injure or Destroy” means lasting damage to a tree that inhibits or 
terminates its growth, excluding pruning or branch removal for 
maintenance purposes.  
s) 
"Logger" means an individual, company, or similar group that cuts 
trees for purchase, sale, or other profit on behalf of a landowner. 
t) 
"Owner" means a person holding any right, title, interest, or equity 
in land. 
u) 
"Permit" means the written authorization from the Woodlands 
Officer provided where County Council has approved an Exemption 
as contemplated in section 8 of this by-law. The Permit shall be in 
the form provided in Schedule “I”. 
v) 
“Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, 
association, firm, trust, or other entity, including anyone acting on 
behalf of or under the authority of such an entity. 
w) 
"Personal Use" means the use of trees that does not involve the 
sale, exchange, or other of trees that are destroyed or injured.  
x) 
"Plantation" means a Woodland where trees have been planted or 
seeded in a predetermined pattern. 
y) 
"Point of Measurement" means the point on the tree trunk 
measured above the location where the ground meets the stump. 
For coppice growth, the point of measurement is where the tree 
stems separate, provided this separation occurs less than 1.27 
meters above the ground. 
z) 
"Prescribed Species" means the species of trees listed in 
Schedule "A” of this Woodlands By-law.  
aa) 
"Prescription" means a pre-harvest silvicultural prescription, a 
document that applies site-specific field data to develop forest 
management guidelines for areas prior to logging. In Ontario, 

prescription approval is part of professional forestry practice and 
requires the signature of a Registered Professional Forester or a 
qualified Associate member of the Ontario Professional Foresters 
Association. 
bb) 
"Registered Professional Forester" as defined in the Professional 
Foresters Act, 2000, S.O. 2000, c.18, as amended or replaced. 
cc) 
"Sensitive Natural Areas" means 
i) 
Provincially significant life science Areas of Natural and 
Scientific Interest (ANSI) 
ii) 
Wetlands designated as locally, regionally or provincially 
significant. 
iii) 
Natural Heritage Features within Middlesex County as 
designated by the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources or 
by the Middlesex County Natural Heritage Systems Study. 
dd) 
“Significant Woodlands” means lands designated as significant 
woodlands in the Middlesex County Natural Heritage Systems 
Study, as amended or replaced, or any other lands that meet the 
criteria for significance as established by this Woodlands By-law or 
subsequent regulations. This designation includes areas essential 
for the conservation of biodiversity, habitat connectivity, and 
ecosystem services. Independently, for the purpose of this 
Woodland By-law, an Officer may also deem lands as Significant 
Woodlands based on a comprehensive assessment of ecological 
value, land use impacts, and environmental sustainability, 
considering factors such as species diversity, habitat quality, and 
the presence of rare or endangered species. 
ee) 
"Silviculture" means the art and science of producing and tending 
forests; the theory and practice of controlling forest establishment, 
composition, growth, and quality to achieve management 
objectives. 
ff) 
“Tree" means a woody perennial plant, whether alive or dead, 
healthy or unhealthy, including saplings or seedlings and their root 
systems, that has reached, could reach, or could have reached a 
height of at least 4.5 metres (15 feet) at physiological maturity. 
gg) 
"Tree Marker" means an individual qualified to mark trees in a 
woodland according to the circumference limit standards set out in 
Section 4(a) of this Woodlands By-law. 
i) 
"Independent Tree Marker": an individual with no economic 
ties to any logger or timber product processor. 
ii) 
"Commercial Tree Marker": an individual employed by a 
logger or a timber product processor. 
hh) 
"UGS" or "Unacceptable Growing Stock" means trees with a high 
risk of dying and expected to decline over the next cutting cycle. 
This includes trees of poor form and/or low quality. 
ii) 
"Woodlands" means land at least one (1) hectare or more in area 
with at least: 

i) 
1000 trees of any size, at DBH, per hectare; 
ii) 
750 trees, measuring over five (5) centimetres in diameter at 
DBH, per hectare; 
iii) 
500 trees, measuring over twelve (12) centimetres in 
diameter at DBH, per hectare; or 
iv) 
250 trees, measuring over twenty (20) centimetres in 
diameter at DBH, per hectare.  
For the purpose of this Woodlands By-law, “Woodlands” includes 
any lands defined as “Significant Woodlands” under Section 3(dd). 
Any reference to “Woodlands” within this Woodlands By-law shall 
be deemed to include “Significant Woodlands” unless otherwise 
specified.  
i) 
This definition excludes: 
a) cultivated fruit or nut orchard; 
b) plantations established for producing Christmas trees; 
and 
c) single tree row width tree fence  
jj) 
"Woodlands Officer" means an individual or individuals appointed 
by the Council of the Corporation of the County of Middlesex to 
administer and enforce this Woodlands By-law. 
4. 
GENERAL PROHIBITION 
a) 
Subject to sections 5 and 8, no Owner or Person shall, through 
their own actions or through the actions of another, conduct 
operations to injure or destroy any trees. Both the Owner and 
Person acting on their behalf are jointly and severally liable for 
compliance with this Woodlands By-law. The destruction, injury, or 
operations involving trees is permitted only if it: 
i) 
Meets Good Foresty Practices as prescribed by a 
Registered Professional Forester or Associate Member, in 
good standing with the Ontario Professional Foresters 
Association;  
ii) 
Involves only those trees which have attained, at the 
specified point of measurement, the Circumference 
measurement that equals or is greater than the minimum 
Circumference prescribed for the species in Schedule "A"; or 
iii) 
Is for the Personal Use of the Owner, provided the Owner 
has been the registered owner the property prior to the date 
of the commencement of the destruction or injury. Both the 
Owner and any Person acting on their behalf are jointly and 
severally liable for compliance with this By-law. 
b) 
The injuring or destruction of trees in accordance with section 
4(a)(ii) or (iii) shall not: 
i) 
Reduce the basal area in the part of the Woodlands where 
trees have been destroyed or injured below 14 m2/ha., of 
trees 25cm. and larger, at DBH, of AGS stock, as determined 
by using the method described in Schedule "B"; or 

ii) 
Reduce the number of trees per hectare below the minimum 
required to be considered Woodlands, unless such reduction 
is part of a woodland management plan by "prescription". 
5. 
LEGISLATED EXEMPTIONS 
a) 
This Woodlands By-law does not apply to:  
i) 
Activities or matters undertaken by a municipality or a local 
board of a municipality;  
ii) 
Activities or matters undertaken under a license issued 
under the Crown Forest Sustainability Act, 1994, as 
amended or replaced;  
iii) 
The injuring or destruction of trees by a person licensed 
under the Surveyors Act, as amended or replaced, to 
engage in the practice of cadastral surveying or their agent, 
while making a survey;  
iv) 
The injuring or destruction of trees imposed as a condition to 
the approval of a site plan, a plan of subdivision, or a 
consent under Sections 41, 51, or 53, respectively, of the 
Planning Act, or as a requirement of a site plan agreement or 
subdivision agreement entered into under those sections;  
v) 
The injuring or destruction of trees imposed as a condition to 
a development permit authorized by regulation made under 
section 70.2 of the Planning Act, or as requirement of an 
agreement entered into under the regulation;  
vi) 
The injuring or destruction of trees by a transmitter or 
distributor, as those terms are defined in Section 2 of the 
Electricity Act, 1998, as amended or replaced, for the 
purpose of constructing and maintaining a transmission 
system or a distribution system, as those terms as defined in 
that section;  
vii) 
The injuring or destruction of trees undertaken on land 
described in a license for a pit or quarry or a Permit for a 
wayside pit or wayside quarry issued under the Aggregate 
Resources Act, as amended or replaced;  
viii) 
The injuring or destruction of trees undertaken on land to 
lawfully establish and operate or enlarge any pit or quarry on 
land, 
1. That has not been designated under the Aggregate 
Resources Act, as amended or replaced, or a 
predecessor of that Act; and 
2. On which a pit or quarry is a Permitted land use under a 
By-law passed under section 34 of the Planning Act. 
c.25, s.135(12); 
ix) 
The injuring or destruction of trees that is required in order to 
erect any building, structure or thing in respect of which a 
Building Permit has been issued and has taken into 
consideration the protection of trees surrounding the 
structure or work within the building envelope, provided that 

no tree is destroyed or injured that is located more than 15 
metres from the outer edge of the building, structure or thing 
and the Woodlands Officer has been notified; or 
x) 
The erection and maintenance of a boundary fence located 
between two adjacent Woodlands. 
6. 
NOTICE OF INTENT TO CUT & COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE 
a) 
Where the destruction or injury of trees is permitted in accordance 
with section 4 of this Woodlands By-law, the following requirements 
must be met no less than fourteen days (14) days prior to the start 
of any destruction or injury of any tree:  
i) 
The Owner or Person acting on their behalf shall submit to 
the County Clerk a Notice of Intent to Cut in the format set 
out in Schedule “C”, Schedule “D” or Schedule “E”, as 
appropriate. 
ii) 
The Owner shall erect a sign in the format prescribed in 
Schedule “F” at the entrance of the adjoining roadway to the 
land where the destruction or injury of the trees is to occur 
and shall be in a position that is clear and visible to the 
public. 
iii) 
The Owner shall ensure all trees to be injured or destroyed 
are marked with paint clearly on at least two (2) opposite 
sides. 
b) 
Upon receipt of a complete Notice of Intent to Cut, the Woodlands 
Officer shall conduct a site inspection and, where, in the opinion of 
the Woodlands Officer, the proposed activity complies with this by-
law, a Compliance Certificate shall be issued by the Woodlands 
Officer. 
c) 
No destruction or injury of trees shall take place unless a 
Compliance Certificate has been issued by the Woodlands Officer 
in relation to the work described in the Notice of Intent to Cut. 
d) 
A Notice of Intent to Cut will not be processed where, in the opinion 
of the Woodlands Officer, the Notice of Intent to Cut is incomplete. 
The Woodlands Officer shall notify the requester if a file has been 
closed for incompleteness. 
7. 
TREE REMOVAL FOR DRAINAGE WORK 
a) 
Except for work on municipal drains, any Owner and/or Person 
undertaking tree removal for drainage work shall notify the 
Woodlands Officer of the proposed removal. 
b) 
Any Owner or Person intending to destroy or injure trees for 
drainage purposes must comply with the following: 
i) 
Tile drainage work through or adjacent to Woodlands must 
use closed tile construction, and any resulting openings in 
the Woodland must not exceed the greater of ten metres 
(10m) canopy-to-canopy or fifteen metres (15m) stem-to-
stem, and 

ii) 
Any tile drainage work through or adjacent to Woodlands 
shall be constructed of closed tile in the part of the drainage 
work that goes through or adjacent to the woodland. 
8. 
APPLICATION FOR COUNCIL EXEMPTION 
a) 
An Owner may apply to County Council for an exemption to Section 
4 of this Woodlands By-law. 
b) 
To be considered for an exemption to section 4, the Owner must 
submit the following to the County Clerk by personal service or 
certified mail, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the start of the 
proposed destruction or injury: 
i) 
An Exemption Application in the form of Schedule “G”; and 
ii) 
Payment of the applicable fee, as set out in By-law #7218 – 
Tariff of Fees, as amended or replaced.   
c) 
Exemption Applications will not be processed where, in the opinion 
of the Woodlands Officer, the application is incomplete. An 
application will be considered incomplete, including but not limited 
to, where: 
i) 
Information is missing or illegible; or 
ii) 
The prescribed application fee has not been paid in full.  
d) 
Where an Exemption Application is deemed incomplete, the 
applicant will be notified by the County Clerk that the file has been 
closed for incompleteness. 
 
e) 
Upon receipt of a completed Exemption Application, the County 
Clerk shall set the date, time and location of the Exemption 
Application hearing. 
f) 
By-law #7264 – Rules of Procedure, as amended or replaced, shall 
apply to an Exemption Application hearing, except that the 
provisions of this section shall prevail to the extent of any conflict. 
g) 
At least twenty-one (21) days prior to consideration of an 
Exemption Application, the County Clerk shall send by regular mail 
a Notice of Exemption Application to the applicant and the 
assessed owners of each parcel of land abutting the Woodlands for 
which an exemption is being sought. 
h) 
A Notice of Exemption Application shall include: 
i) 
A reference to the provisions of this by-law under which the 
Exemption Application is being considered; 
ii) 
The date, time and location of the hearing of the Exemption 
Application; and 
iii) 
Any other information the Clerk considers necessary for the 
proper conduct of the hearing. 
i) 
The Woodlands Officer shall erect and display a public notice 
regarding the Exemption Application at the entrance of the 

adjoining roadway to the land where the exemption is being sought 
in a position that is clear and visible to the public at least twenty-
one (21) days prior to consideration of the application by County 
Council. The notice shall be in the form of Schedule "H". 
j) 
The Applicant shall be given the opportunity to make written or oral 
submissions at the Exemption Application hearing.  
k) 
When granting an exemption, County Council may include any 
terms or conditions to its approval provided the terms or conditions 
are desirable for the appropriate development or use of the land on 
which the exemption is sought, and the general purpose and intent 
of this Woodlands By-law is maintained. 
l) 
An Exemption may be granted to the applicant for an initial term of 
one (1) year. Upon expiry, such term may be extended by resolution 
of Council for an additional term of one (1) year. 
m) 
Where an exemption is granted, the Owner shall be provided with a 
Permit in the form of Schedule “I”. The Owner shall ensure that a 
copy of the Permit is posted on the land where the destruction or 
injury of trees is to occur. The Permit must remain clearly visible for 
the duration of the work contemplated in the application.  
n) 
Where an exemption is denied, the County Clerk shall provide 
written notice to the applicant by regular mail or electronic mail. 
o) 
The decision of County Council under this section is final. 
9. 
ORDERS TO DISCONTINUE ACTIVITY 
a) 
Where a Woodlands Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this 
Woodlands By-law has occurred, the Woodlands Officer may make 
an order requiring the Owner and/or the Person who contravened 
the By-law, or who caused or permitted the injuring or destruction of 
trees in contravention of the By-law to stop the injuring or 
destruction of trees. The order shall set out the information 
contained in Schedule "J". 
b) 
An order issued under this section may be served personally or 
served by sending it by mail to the last known address of; 
i) 
the Owner of the Woodlands; and 
ii) 
the Owner or Person identified as injuring, destroying or 
harvesting a tree or trees. 
c) 
Where service of an order is made by mail, service shall be 
deemed to have been served on the fifth day after the order is 
mailed. 
d) 
Where service cannot be carried out under subsection 9(b), it is 
deemed sufficient if the Woodlands Officer places a placard 
containing the terms of the Order in a conspicuous place on the 
affected lands and the placing of the placard shall be deemed to be 
sufficient service of the Order on the Owner and/or Person to whom 
the Order is directed. 
 
 

10. 
APPEAL OF ORDER 
a) 
If the Owner or Person to whom the order is directed is not satisfied 
with the terms of the Order, they may appeal to County Council by 
filing a Notice of Appeal in the form of Schedule “K” by personal 
service or certified mail with the County Clerk within thirty (30) days 
of the date of the Order. 
b) 
Upon receipt of a completed Notice of Appeal, the County Clerk 
shall set the date, time and location of the Appeal hearing. 
c) 
By-law #7264 – Rules of Procedure, as amended or replaced, shall 
apply to an Appeal hearing, except that the provisions of this 
section shall prevail to the extent of any conflict. 
d) 
At least twenty-one (21) days prior to consideration of an Appeal 
under this section, the County Clerk shall send by regular mail a 
Notice of Appeal Hearing to the applicant and the assessed owners 
of each parcel of land abutting the Woodlands subject to the Order. 
e) 
A Notice of Appeal Hearing shall include: 
i) 
A reference to the provisions of this by-law under which the 
appeal hearing is being held; 
ii) 
The date, time, location and format of the appeal hearing; 
and 
iii) 
Any other information the Clerk considers necessary for the 
proper conduct of the hearing. 
f) 
Where an appeal has been filed, Council shall hear the appeal and 
have all the powers and functions of the Officer. 
g) 
The appellant shall be given the opportunity to make written or oral 
submissions at the appeal hearing.  
h) 
After hearing an appeal, County Council may confirm or revoke any 
Order issued under this Woodlands By-law or may issue a Permit 
with conditions, provided that in the opinion of the Council, the 
general intent and purpose of this Woodlands By-law has been 
maintained. 
i) 
The County Clerk shall provide written notice of County Council’s 
decision to the appellant by regular mail or electronic mail. 
j) 
The decision of County Council under this section is final. 
11. 
OFFENCES 
A person and/or Owner shall not:  
a) 
Fail to submit a Notice of Intent to Cut as required under this 
Woodlands By-law; 
b) 
Injure or destroy any trees prior to the issuance of a Compliance 
Certificate as required under this Woodlands By-law; 
c) 
Fail to comply with an Order issued under this Woodlands By-law; 

d) 
Contravene the terms or conditions of a Permit issued under this 
Woodlands By-law; 
e) 
Remove or deface any Order issued under this Woodlands By-law; 
f) 
Operate a vehicle, equipment or machinery or conduct their 
operations in such a manner or at such a time that results in 
excessive damage to the soil, wetlands, natural areas or other 
portions of the Woodlands; 
g) 
Operate a vehicle, machinery or equipment or conduct operations 
in a manner or at a time, that results in the leaving of any part of a 
tree in a watercourse including any trees that have not been cut, 
but have been pushed, knocked over or otherwise ended up in a 
watercourse; 
h) 
Fail to comply with any other requirement of this Woodlands By-law 
or any condition imposed under this By-law. 
12. 
PENALTY 
a) 
Any Person and/or Owner who contravenes any provision of this 
Woodlands By-law, or any Order issued under Section 9, is guilty of 
an offence and, upon conviction, is liable to a fine of one thousand 
dollars ($1,000.00) per tree, up to the maximum limit allowed under 
the Municipal Act, as amended or replaced. 
b) 
If a Person and/or Owner is convicted of an offence for 
contravening this Woodlands By-law or an Order issued under 
Section 9, the court where the conviction is entered, and any court 
of competent jurisdiction thereafter, may order the Person and/or 
Owner to take appropriate remedial action, including but not limited 
to the rehabilitation of the land or the planting or replanting of trees. 
The court may also prohibit the continuation or repetition of the 
offence by the convicted Person and/or Owner. 
13. 
ENFORCEMENT 
a) 
This Woodlands By-law shall be enforced by a Woodlands Officer 
appointed by the County. 
b) 
The Woodlands Officer may, at any reasonable time, enter and 
inspect any land to determine whether this Woodlands By-law, an 
Order, or a condition of a permit is being complied with by the 
Owner and/or Person responsible for the land or the activities 
taking place. 
c) 
Any Owner or Person who obstructs or interferes with the 
Woodlands Officer in the discharge of their duties under this 
Woodlands By-law shall be considered in violation of this 
Woodlands By-law. 
14. 
ADMINISTRATION 
a) 
Sections 1 to 13 above shall form part of this Woodlands By-law. 
b) 
If any section or sections of this Woodlands By-law or parts thereof 
are found by any Court to be illegal or beyond the power of the 
Council to enact, such Section or Sections or parts thereof shall be 
deemed to be severable and all other Sections or parts of this 

Woodlands By-law shall be deemed to be separate and 
independent there from and continue in full force and effect unless 
and until similarly found illegal. 
c)
The previous By-law No. 5738 is hereby repealed and replaced by
this Woodlands By-law.
d)
Despite subsection (c) above, By-law No. 5738 of the Corporation
of the County of Middlesex shall continue to apply to proceedings in
respect of offences that occurred before its repeal of any legally
binding contracts proof of which has been received by an Officer.
e)
This Woodlands By-law shall become effective on the day it is
passed in Council, this 14th day of January, 2025.
PASSED IN COUNCIL this 14th day of January, 2025. 
_____________________________ 
Brian Ropp, Warden 
_____________________________ 
Marci Ivanic, County Clerk 
Original Signed 
Original Signed 

SCHEDULE “A” 
CIRCUMFERENCE LIMITS BY TREE SPECIES 
 
SPECIES A 
 
ASH 
- White (Fraxinus americana) 
 
MAPLE 
-Sugar (Acer saccharum) 
 
 
- Black (Acer nigrum)  
 
 
- Red (Acer rubrum) 
 
 
- Silver (Acer saccharinum) 
 
 
- Freeman (Acer freemanii) 
 
OAK 
- Red (Quercus rubra) 
 
 
- Black (Quercus velutina) 
 
 
- White (Quercus alba) 
 
 
- Swamp White (Quercus bicolour) 
 
 
- Bur (Quercus macrocarpa) 
TULIP - (Liriodendron tulipifera) 
 
WALNUT - Black (Juglans nigra) 
 
 
SPECIES A MEASUREMENTS 
  
Point of Measurement 
 
Circumference 
 
Diameter 
 
31 cm (12 in) 
 
175 cm (69 in) 
 
56 cm (22 in) 
 
20 cm (8 in) 
 
191 cm (75 in) 
 
61 cm (24 in) 
 
10 cm (4 in) 
 
224 cm (88 in) 
 
71 cm (28 in) 
 
SPECIES B 
 
ASH- Green/Red (Fraxinus pennsylvanica) 
 
BASSWOOD - (Tilia americana) 
 
BEECH - American (Fagus grandifolia) 
 
CHERRY - Black (Prunus serotina) 
HACKBERRY - (Celtis occidentalis) 
 
HEMLOCK - Eastern (Tsuga canadensis) 
 
PINE - White (Pinus strobus) 
SPECIES B MEASUREMENTS 
 
 
Point of Measurement 
 
Circumference 
 
Diameter 
 
31 cm (12 in) 
 
160 cm (63 in) 
 
51 cm (20 in) 
 
20 cm (8 in) 
 
175 cm (69 in) 
 
56 cm (22 in) 
 
10 cm (4 in) 
 
208 cm (82 in) 
 
66 cm (26 in) 
 
  

*NOTE:  Please refer to Species at Risk Act at www.sararegistry.gc.ca and Species at risk 
in Ontario (SARO) at www.ontario.ca for more information. 
 
 
SPECIES C 
 
BIRCH 
 -Yellow (Betula alleghaniensis) 
 
ELM 
 -White (Ulmus americana)  
 
 
 -Rock (Ulmus thomasii) 
 
 
 -Red (Ulmus rubra) 
 
 
HICKORY   -Shagbark (Carya ovata) 
 
 
  -Bitternut (Carya cordiformis) 
LARCH 
- (Larix decidua) 
 
POPLAR -Balsam (Populus balsamifera) 
-Eastern Cottonwood  
 (Populus  deltoides) 
 
SYCAMORE - (Platanus occidentalis) 
 
SPECIES C MEASUREMENTS 
 
 
Point of Measurement 
 
Circumference 
 
Diameter 
 
31 cm (12 in) 
 
145 cm (57 in) 
 
46 cm (18 in) 
 
20 cm (8 in) 
 
160 cm (63 in) 
 
51 cm (20 in) 
 
10 cm (4 in) 
 
191 cm (75 in) 
 
61 cm (22 in) 
 
SPECIES D 
 
BIRCH 
- White (Betula papyrifera) 
 
CEDAR 
- White (Thuja occidentalis) 
 
POPLAR - Largetooth Aspen (Populus grandidentata) 
 
 
- Trembling Aspen (Populus tremuloides) 
  
Point of Measurement 
 
Circumference 
 
Diameter 
 
31 cm (12 in) 
 
79 cm (31 in) 
 
25 cm (10 in) 
 
20 cm (8 in) 
 
97 cm (38 in) 
 
31 cm (12 in) 
 
10 cm (4 in) 
 
 127 cm (50 in) 
 
41 cm (16 in) 
 
RARE SPECIES (2024 data) - the following species should be avoided during tree removal 
operations: 
 
Black/ Blue Ash 
 
Shumard Oak  
 
 
Black Gum 
Cucumber Tree 
 
Tamarack 
 
 
 
American chestnut 
Shellbark Hickory 
 
Pawpaw 
 
 
 
Chinquapin Oak 
Pignut Hickory 
 
Balsam Fir 
 
 
 
Kentucky Coffee Tree 
Butternut  
 
Dwarf Hackberry 
 
 
Cherry birch 
Pumpkin Ash 
 
Eastern flowering dogwood  
Red mulberry 

SCHEDULE “B” 
BASAL AREA CALCULATION AND ASSESSMENT 
1. Point Sampling is defined as a method of selecting trees for measurement and for estimating stand 
basal area using tree size rather than frequency as the main parameter.  Trees are tallied at a 
sample location or point sample, with the selection probability being proportional to the basal area 
of the trees.  In point sampling, a 360-degree sweep is made with an angle gauge about a fixed 
point, and the stems whose breast height diameter appear larger than the fixed angle subtended 
by the angle gauge are included in the sample.  Point samples will be taken using a factor 2 prism. 
2. Basal Area will be assessed every 30 metres along a fixed compass bearing through a forest stand 
in which harvesting has occurred.  The first point sample will be placed 60 metres from the dripline 
of the woodland.  No less than 3 point samples will be taken along a compass bearing through a 
forest stand.  If the average basal area/hectare is found to be below the requirements of the by-law, 
then a second compass line will be established from the mid-point of the 1st compass line and will 
run in a direction 90 degrees from the compass bearing from the 1st line. 
See sample illustration below: 
 
Line 1 
 
 
Line 2 
 
 
 
The following format will be used in calculating average basal area per hectare: 
Stations Tallied 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 
5 
 
6 
 
7 
 
8 
 
9 
 
10 
 
11 
 
12 
 
13 
 
14 
 
15 
 
16 
 
17 
 
18 
 
19 
 
20 
 
21 
 
22 
 
23 
 
24 
 
25 
 
26 
 
27 
 
28 
 
29 
 
30 
 
31 
 
32 
 
33 
 
34 
 
35 
 
36 
 
37 
 
38 
 
39 
 
40 
 
Plot # 
 
Small 
26-40 cm 
 
Medium 
42-48 cm 
 
Large 
50-60 cm 
 
X-Large 
62+ cm 
 
Total 
All Sizes 
 
Total 
** 
 
 
 
AGS 
 
UGS 
 
AGS 
 
UGS 
 
AGS 
 
UGS 
 
AGS 
 
UGS 
 
AGS 
 
UGS 
 
 
 
# of 
trees 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**Total Trees (          ) x Basal Area Factor (          ) = (           ) Actual BA/Ha 
Number of Stations Sampled (             ) 
 
Basal Area Calculation and Assessment 
To assess tree infractions, a minimum of one (1) plot per hectare will be established for areas up to 10 
hectares (25 acres), and one (1) plot for every additional five (5) hectares (12 acres). Plots will be 
placed 80 metres (262 ft.) apart and 40 metres (131 ft.) from stand edges. 
In cases where the maximum DBH encounters is less than 60 cm, the plot distance may be 60 metres 
(197 ft.) and 30 metres (98 ft.) from stand edges. 
In any case, sampling is to be done by a method customarily used in forestry practice. 

SCHEDULE “C” 
NOTICE OF INTENT - GOOD FORESTRY PRACTICE  
PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY USING BLACK INK 
The completed Notice of Intent must be received by the County Clerks office via email or mail to clerk@middlesex.ca or 
399 Ridout Street North, London, ON N6A2P1. All Sections must be completed fully. Failure to do so will render this Notice 
of Intent null and void, and it will be returned to the applicant for completion. This Notice of Intent is valid for one (1) 
year from the date of submission. 
 
Property Owner: Surname:  
Given Name:   
 
 
Address:  
Postal Code:  
 
 
Telephone Number: ( 
)  
Email Address     
 
(Required for approval communication) 
Forest Location:  Lot  
Concession  
Municipality   
 
 
Forest 911  
 
 
 
Reason for Tree Removal 
Commercial Timber Harvest 
 
Stand Improvement 
 
Firewood Removal 
 
Other (specify) 
 
 
 
TREE HARVEST SUMMARY 
 
(A legible tally sheet can be substituted and attached) 
 
Tree Species 
No. 
TOTAL TREES 
 
VOLUME ESTIMATE (m3):  
 
 
Harvest Area (ha):   
 
 
 
GOOD FORESTRY PRACTICE 
APPLICATIONS MUST INCLUDE THE 
FOLLOWING DOCUMENTATION 
 
• 
A forest operations silvicultural prescription written 
and approved by a qualified individual. 
• 
Short (5 yrs) and Long (20+ yrs) term forestry 
related objectives. 
• 
Instructions for tree markers. 
• 
Current species composition, age, height, 
stocking, stand quality, site class, regeneration. 
• 
Description of significant features, and 
integrated resource management 
considerations. 
 
PRESCRIPTION INFORMATION 
 
Prescription prepared by:   
 
Mailing Address:   
  
Email:   
 
(Required for approval communication) 
Telephone Number:   
 
Qualifications: 
  
Date Prescription Prepared:   
  
  Check if the area has been inspected since tree marking. 
TREE MARKER INFORMATION 
 
Trees Marked By:   
 
Mailing Address:   
 
Email:   
 
(Required for approval communication) 
Telephone Number:   
 
 
Qualifications: 
 
  
Paint Colour:  
Date Marked:   
   
All trees to be cut shall be marked with a paint spot on 
opposite sides of the tree at a height no lower than 1.37 
metres above the highest point of ground at the base of 
the tree. The mark shall be at least 8 centimetres in 
diameter for hardwood sawlogs/conifer poles or sawlogs 
and  a  slash  20  centimetres  long  for  fuelwood/conifer 

sawlogs/pulp. A similar mark shall be placed at the base 
of the tree below the saw line and extending to the ground. 
All trees shall be marked facing the same direction, unless 
the terrain requires a change in direction, in which case 
the marking will proceed consistently with the terrain. 
CONTRACTOR INFORMATION 
Surname: 
Email:   
(Required for approval communication) 
Address: 
Postal Code: 
Telephone Number: 
Person in charge of Harvesting Trees: 
Estimated Starting Date: 
Person in charge of harvesting trees is required to 
provide 24 hours verbal, fax or email confirmation to 
the Woodland Conservation Officer 
prior to start date. 
INDICATE NORTH 
○ 
Map must be legible and include: 
Preferred entry points for inspection 
Location/name of surrounding roads 
Location of buildings on property 
Forested areas and harvest areas 
Log landing(s) 
Power lines and Municipal ditches 
It is requested that if loggers are working near or 
adjacent to power lines that they contact the local 
Hydro Utility Company for assistance to prevent an 
accident and any damage that may occur to hydro 
lines and equipment due to a logging accident. 
□ 
Conservation Land Tax Incentive Program 
Managed Forest Tax Incentive Program □ 
Please indicate if the property enrolled in: 
Please attach property map from County website found here: (www.middlesex.ca) 

Basal Area - Distribution of Cut (Complete below or attach a forest operations silvicultural prescription) 
 
 
Prism Tally: 
m2 / ha 
Basal Area Factor:   
 
  
Tree 
Size 
(cm) 
Actual BA (m2/ha) 
BA to Cut (m2/ha) 
Actual Residual BA (m2/ha) 
Ideal BA 
AGS 
UGS 
Total 
AGS 
UGS 
Total 
AGS 
UGS 
Total 
10 - 24 
4 
26-40 
5 
42-48 
5 
50-60 
4 
62 + 
2 
Total 
20 
 
(Complete below or attach a forest operations silvicultural prescription and Distribution of Cut.) 
 
If the landowner is selling standing timber to a logger for harvesting has: 
YES 
NO 
a contract been signed between landowner and contractor? 
the contractor provided proof of WSIB coverage for employees/liability insurance coverage? 
the contractor provided proof of cutter/skidder certification for all employees and themselves? 
the main skid trail has been delineated? 
Have arrangements been made to harvest the fuel wood from tree tops? 
 
I agree that operations will be in accordance with the provisions of the Woodlands Conservation By-law as  
amended of the Corporation of the County of Middlesex and that I am familiar with the contents and requirements 
of this By-law and acknowledge having received a copy thereof. I further agree that any tree harvested will  
be in accordance with Good Forestry Practices. 
 
    Further, I agree to contact the Woodland Conservation Officer 14 days prior to commencing harvesting of trees. 
 
 
Signature of Prescription Writer 
Date 
Signature of Tree Marker (if applicable) 
Date 
 
 
Signature of Landowner 
Date 
Signature of Contractor (if applicable) 
Date 
 
 
 
C.25, AN APPOINTED OFFICER CAN ENTER THE DESCRIBED PROPERTY FOR THE PURPOSES OF 
UNDERTAKING AN INSPECTION. INDIVIDUALS FILING A NOTICE OF INTENT FOR GOOD FORESTRY 
PRACTICES THAT DO NOT QUALIFY FOR THIS EXEMPTION WILL BE NOTIFIED WITHIN 5 WORKING DAYS 
 
I UNDERSTAND THAT UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THIS BY-LAW AND THE MUNICIPAL ACT, R.S.O. 2001, 

SCHEDULE “D” 
 NOTICE OF INTENT – CIRCUMFERENCE LIMIT  
 
PURSUANT TO WOODLANDS BY-LAW NO. 7314 
 
Completed Notice of Intent:  Submit via email or mail to the attention of the County Clerk at 
clerk@middlesex.ca or 399 Ridout Street North, London, ON N6A2P1 (Tel: 519-434-7321)  
Submission Deadline: AT LEAST 14 DAYS PRIOR TO THE PROPOSED COMMENCEMENT OF THE 
DESTRUCTION OR INJURY OF TREES. 
Circumference Limit Harvest - refer to Schedule “B”. Residual Basal Area (BA) - 14 m2/ha – trees 
greater than 24 cm. Residual BA must meet or exceed 14m2/ha after harvest, using the assessment 
format defined in Schedule “B”. 
 
Please Print - All sections must be completed on this Notice. Failure to do so will render this Notice of 
Intent null and void, and it will be returned to the applicant. 
 
Property Owner (Name):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City/Town: 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Code: ___________________ Tel: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Required for approval communication) 
 
Contractor Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City/Town: 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Code: ____________________ Tel:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Required for approval communication) 
 
On-Site Person in Charge of the Harvest of Trees:   
 
 
Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected Starting Date: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location of Woodlot: Lot  
 
 Con.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Municipality Woodlot is in: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Woodlot 911 Address:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Woodlot Roll Number:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason for Removal: Commercial Timber Harvest  
 
 Stand Improvement   
 
 
 
Firewood Removal  
 
 
 
Other  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approximate Size of Woodland: _______________________________________ 
 
 
 
Area of Harvest:  Please attach property map from County website found here: (www.middlesex.ca) 
 

SCHEDULE “D” 
 NOTICE OF INTENT – CIRCUMFERENCE LIMIT 
Trees Marked by:  
Mailing Address:  
Tel. _________________________ E-mail 
(required) 
Qualifications:   
Responsibility Notice: 
It is the responsibility of the Owner, Person, or authorized agent to mark all trees to be harvested with 
paint on two sides. This Notice of Intent will become null and void if harvesting does not occur within 
twelve (12) months of receipt. A copy of this Notice must be on site at all times and in possession of the 
person in charge of cutting.  
TREE HARVEST SUMMARY 
Tree Species 
Count 
Volumes 
Please submit a printed map from County 
website www.middlesex.ca  
Total Trees 
If the landowner is selling standing timber to a contractor for removal, has a contract been signed 
between landowner and contractor? Yes  
 
 
 
 No  
I agree that all tree cutting operations will be in accordance with the provisions of Middlesex County 
Woodlands Conservation By-Law No. (7314), and that I am familiar with the components and 
requirements of this and acknowledge having received a copy thereof. 
Further, I agree to contact the Forestry Officer (519-434-7321 ext. 2253) 24 hours prior to commencing 
cutting of trees set out in this notice. 
Dated at 
this 
 day of 
, 20 
. 
Signature of Contractor 
Signature of Property Owner or Authorized Agent 

SCHEDULE “E” 
 NOTICE OF INTENT – PERSONAL USE 
 
PURSUANT TO WOODLANDS BY-LAW NO. 7314 
 
Completed Notice of Intent: Submit via email or mail to the attention of the County Clerk at 
clerk@middlesex.ca or 399 Ridout Street North, London, ON N6A2P1 (Tel: 519-434-7321)  
Submission Deadline: AT LEAST 14 DAYS PRIOR TO THE PROPOSED COMMENCEMENT OF THE 
DESTRUCTION OR INJURY OF TREES. 
Personal Use Harvest - refer to Schedule “A”. Residual Basal Area (BA) - 14 m2/ha – trees greater than 
24 cm. Residual BA must meet or exceed 14m2/ha after harvest, using the assessment format defined in 
Schedule “A”. The harvest shall not reduce the number of trees per hectare below the minimum required 
to be considered woodland. 
 
PLEASE PRINT - All sections must be completed on this Notice. Failure to do so will render this Notice 
of Intent null and void, and it will be returned to the applicant. 
 
Property Owner (Name):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City/Town: 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Code: ___________________ Tel: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Required for approval communication) 
 
Contractor Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Address: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City/Town: 
 
 
 
 
 
Postal Code: ____________________ Tel: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Required for approval communication) 
 
On-Site Person in Charge of the Harvest of Trees:   
 
 
Name:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Expected Starting Date: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location of Woodlot: Lot  
 
 Con.  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Municipality Woodlot is in: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Woodlot 911 Address:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Woodlot Roll Number:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reason for Removal:  
 
Firewood Removal  
 
 
 
Personal Use  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SCHEDULE “E” 
 NOTICE OF INTENT – PERSONAL USE 
Approximate Size of Woodland:  
Area of Harvest:  Please attach property map from County website found here: (www.middlesex.ca) 
Trees Marked by:  
Mailing Address:  
Tel. _________________________ E-mail 
Qualifications if applicable:  
Responsibility Notice: 
It is the responsibility of the Owner, Person, or authorized agent to mark all trees to be harvested with 
paint on two sides. This Notice of Intent will become null and void if harvesting does not occur within 
twelve (12) months of receipt. A copy of this Notice must be on site at all times and in possession of the 
person in charge of cutting.  
TREE HARVEST SUMMARY 
Tree Species 
Count 
Volumes 
Please submit a printed map from County 
website www.middlesex.ca  
Total Trees 
I agree that all tree cutting operations will be in accordance with the provisions of Middlesex County 
Woodlands Conservation By-Law No. 7314, and that I am familiar with the components and requirements 
of this and acknowledge having received a copy thereof. 
Further, I agree to contact the Forestry Officer (519-434-7321 ext. 2253) 24 hours prior to commencing 
cutting of trees set out in this notice. 
Dated at 
this 
day of 
, 20 
. 
Signature of Property Owner or Authorized Agent 

Schedule “F” 
NOTICE OF TREE HARVEST 
DO NOT ENTER during harvest for your own safety. 
This notice does not grant unrestricted access. 
Permission to enter these lands must be obtained from the landowner. 
Contractor: 
Phone:  
Owner:  
Timber Harvest Date:  
Timber Marked By: 
 
Phone Number of Marker: 
This notice is posted under the authority of the County of Middlesex 
Woodlands Conservation By-Law, as amended or replaced.  
This notice is to be posted before the commencement of the 
harvest and remain in place for no less than ten (10) days after the 
harvest is completed. Failure to post or early removal of this notice 
constitutes a chargeable offence. 
If you should have any questions or concerns regarding this timber 
harvest, please contact: 
County of Middlesex Forestry Officer at 519-434-7321 x 2253 

SCHEDULE “G” 
COUNCIL EXEMPTION FOR WOODLAND CLEARING PERMIT 
PURSUANT TO WOODLANDS CONSERVATION BY-LAW NO. 7314 
Name(s) of Owner:  
Address:  
Postal Code: Telephone: __________ 
Or:  
E-mail:   
(Required for approval communication) 
Location of Trees Affected / Ownership 
Municipality ______________________ 
Assessment Roll Number: 
Lot _______   Concession _________ 
911 Address 
  
Property owned by applicant? YES  
NO 
(if no, authorizing letter must be attached) 
If purchased within the last three years, state name and address of former owner and the date you 
purchased it. __________________________________________________________________ 
Property / Forest Description 
This application is requesting a Permit to remove the following (please indicate) 
Total Area: ____________________Hectares ________________ Acres __________________ 
Total Woodland Hectares (Acres) on the Property:  
Hectares 
Acres 
Tree species to be destroyed on the described land: 
This Permit is requested for the following reasons, including description of end use after trees 
have been destroyed: 
Is the applicant willing to offset the destruction of trees on the subject property through replanting trees 
on said property. Yes  
 
No    
Indicate how many acres ______ hectares _____ you are willing to replant? Total area ___________ 
Please include a map of the proposed area you are requesting to be removed and the replanting area. 
Map is included.  Yes __________ (please use https://www.middlesex.ca/departments/mapping) 
If the applicant cannot replant in lieu of destruction is the applicant willing to make payment in lieu of 
destruction? Yes _____ 
Has the owner previously made an application for and been granted permission to destroy or injure trees? 
Yes ______ 
No ______ 
Please return this application with a cheque made payable to the Corporation of the  County 
of Middlesex in the amount specified per the County’s By-law to Prescribe a Tariff of Fees, as 
amended or replaced, to the County Clerk’s Office, 399 Ridout Street North, London, Ontario. 
N6A 2P1. 
Personal information on this form is collected under the authority of the Municipal Act. Pursuant 
to the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, questions about  
the collection of personal information should be directed to the Clerk. 

SCHEDULE “G” 
 
COUNCIL EXEMPTION FOR WOODLAND CLEARING PERMIT 
 
Woodland Clearing Permit Requirements / Information 
I. 
A Council Exemption (Woodland Clearing Permit) application must be completed in full to be 
processed. An application for an area greater than one (1) hectare (2.5 acres) must be accompanied 
by an Environmental Impact Study. 
II. 
When an Owner or authorized agent inquires about the Woodlands By-law, it shall be standard practice 
for the Officer to inspect the property to determine whether an application for a Council Exemption is 
necessary. Notice of this permit application shall be sent by regular mail to all landowners whose 
lands abut the land outlined in the application. Landowners separated by a public road allowance 
shall also be considered abutting landowners. The application may also be circulated to relevant 
government agencies for review and comments (i.e., Conservation Authorities, Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Ministry of Agriculture & Food, and local Municipalities). 
III. 
Any person applying for a Council Exemption Permit shall erect and display a public notice regarding 
the Council Exemption application at the entrance from the adjoining roadway to the land where the 
Council Exemption Permit is being sought. This notice must be placed in a position that is clear and 
visible to all persons, and follow the format provided in Schedule “H”. 
IV. 
The hearing for the application shall not be scheduled less than twenty-one (21) Business Days from 
receipt of the completed application. 
V. 
If the application is approved, an on-site inspection will be conducted, and the perimeter of the forest 
cover that will remain will be marked with paint or another clear indicator to denote the extent of the 
approved Permit area. Any trees destroyed outside the approved area will be considered a violation 
under the Woodland By-law. 
 
Declaration 
I,  
of the  
in the County 
of Middlesex, solemnly declare that: 
All the above statements, and the statements contained in all accompanying exhibits, are true. 
I make this solemn declaration conscientiously, believing it to be true and knowing that it 
carries the same force and effect as if made under oath. 
 
Declared before me at the   
 
of 
 
 
  
in the  
of  
this  
day of  
20  
. 
 
 
 
     
Signature of Owner or Authorized Agent 
A Commissioner etc. 
Note 1: If signed by an agent, written authorization from the owner must accompany the application. If the applicant 
is a corporation, the application shall be signed by an officer of the corporation and the corporation’s seal 
shall be affixed. 
 
Note 2: Each application must be accompanied by a map showing the parcel of land that is the subject of the 
application, including the boundaries and dimensions of the total holdings. The map must also indicate the 
size and area of the trees to be removed, portions of the woodland to be retained, and the location of the 
property in relation to abutting properties, specifying their land use (e.g., residential, agricultural, cottage, 
commercial, etc.) 

 
 
SCHEDULE “H” 
PUBLIC NOTICE 
Woodlands Conservation By-law  
 
This posted notice does not grant unrestricted access. Interested parties must obtain 
permission from the landowner to enter these forested lands. 
 
AN APPLICATION FOR AN EXEMPTION TO THE WOODLANDS BY-LAW HAS 
BEEN SUBMITTED TO COUNCIL AFFECTING THESE FORESTED LANDS: 
 
 
Lot: 
  
 
Concession: 
  
 
Municipality: 
  
 
911 Address: 
  
 
Landowner: 
  
 
 
THE APPLICATION SUBMITTED REQUESTS THE CLEARING OF  
HECTARES 
OF FORESTED LAND. 
 
Deadline for Written Comments: 
 
COMMENTS CAN BE SUBMITTED TO THE ADDRESS LISTED BELOW: 
 
County of Middlesex 399 Ridout St, N. London, ON N6A 2P1 
 
This Notice is posted under the authority of Middlesex County Woodlands Conservation By-law 
No. 7314. 
 
This Notice is to remain posted no less than ten (10) Business Days prior to consideration of 
this application. 
 
Further Information or written notice please contact the County of Middlesex Conservation 
Officer. Tel. 519-434-7321 Ext: 2253 or clerk@middlesex.ca 

County of Middlesex 
399 Ridout Street North  
London, ON N6A 2P1 
(519) 434-7321 (fax) 434-0638 
 
If you have any questions or concerns, please contact the 
 
Middlesex County Woodlands Officer at 519-434-7321 x2253. 
 
SCHEDULE “I” 
 
WOODLAND CLEARING PERMIT 
 
Permission is hereby granted by the Council of the Corporation of 
the County of Middlesex to destroy trees under the direction of the 
Woodland Conservation Officer, as outlined below: 
 
REFERENCE APPLICATION: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSUED TO: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOT:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONCESSION:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MUNICIPALITY:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF ISSUE:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE OF EXPIRY:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BY: MIDDLESEX COUNTY COUNCIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PER: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name 
Director of Planning and Development  
The Corporation of the County of Middlesex 

 
It is an offence to remove or deface any Order issued under this Woodlands By-law. 
SCHEDULE “J” 
STOP WORK ORDER 
YOU ARE HEREBY DIRECTED AND ORDERED to immediately stop, halt, 
cease, and desist from any and all activities associated with the destruction 
or removal of trees from the following lands: 
 
MUNICIPAL ADDRESS/LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
Lot:  
 
Part Lot:  
 
 
 
Concession:   
 
Municipality:   
 
 
 
Owner of Property:   
 
 
Individual responsible for destruction or injury of trees: 
 
 
Description of Infraction: 
 
1. Failure to apply for a Council exemption for the purpose of tree clearing under Schedule “G” of the 
Woodlands By-law. 
2. Destruction and injury of trees in contravention of the Woodland By-law 7314. 
3. Destruction and injury of trees without the use of Good Forestry Practice as prescribed by a 
Registered Professional Forester in good standing with the Ontario Professional Foresters 
Association or an associate member in good standing of the Ontario Professional Foresters 
Association. 
4. Acting on behalf of an owner and failing to submit a Notice of Intent, where every owner of Woodlands 
or person acting on behalf of the owner who intends to destroy or injure trees personally or through 
another person must submit a Notice of Intent, contrary to section 6 of the Woodlands By-law 7314. 
5. Operating a vehicle, equipment, or machinery, or conduct operations in a manner or at a time that 
results in excessive damage to soil, wetlands, natural areas, or other portions of the woodlands. 
 
Date of Inspection:  
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Order Date:   DATE OF INSPECTION 
To:  
6 MONTHS AFTER DATE OF INSPECTION 
 
 
 
Signature of Officer:   
 
 
                Date:  
 
Pursuant to Middlesex County Woodlands Conservation By-law, Section 10(a), subsection (e), if the person to 
whom the Order is directed has been served in accordance with this Woodlands By-law and is not satisfied with 
the terms of the Order, they may appeal to County Council by filing a Notice of Appeal through personal service 
or certified mail to the County Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of the Order. 

County of Middlesex 
399 Ridout Street North  
London, ON N6A 2P1 
(519) 434-7321 (fax) 434-0638 
 
SCHEDULE “K” 
 
NOTICE OF APPEAL 
 
PURSUANT TO WOODLANDS CONSERVATION BY-LAW NO. 7314 
 
 
Date the Stop Work Order was Issued:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name(s) of Owner:  
 
 
  
Address:  
 
 
 
Postal Code:  
 
 
 
Telephone:  
 
 
 
Email:   
 
 
  
 
Reason for Appeal of Stop Work Order 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Signature of Owner or Authorized Agent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
     
 
 
 

