New By-laws Protect Trees in Saugeen Shores | Town of Saugeen Shores
Skip to main content
Skip to footer
Town of Saugeen Shores
Menu
Home, Property and Environment
Expand sub pages Home, Property and Environment
Animal Services
Building and Renovation
Environment
Garbage and Recycling
Locates
Property Taxes
Resources for New Residents
Roads and Parking
Water Services and Billing
Recreation, Facilities and Culture
Expand sub pages Recreation, Facilities and Culture
Airport
Arenas
Arts, Music and Culture
Events Calendar
Camping
Cemeteries
Harbour
History and Heritage
Libraries
Facilities and Rentals
Parks and Trails
Pryde Aquatic and Wellness Centre
Sports and Recreation
Visiting Saugeen Shores
Waterfront and Beaches
Business and Development
Expand sub pages Business and Development
Advertising and Sponsorships
Available Land and Buildings
Bids and Tenders
Business Directory
Business Improvement Areas
Business Licences
Community Profile
Development Dashboard
Doing Business in Saugeen Shores
Indigenous Partnerships
Innovation Park
Planning and Development Services
Zoning
Health, Safety and Community Support
Expand sub pages Health, Safety and Community Support
Accessibility
Emergency Preparedness
Fire Department
Health Care
Places of Worship
Police Services
Resources for New Residents
Schools and Childcare
Social Services
Town Hall
Expand sub pages Town Hall
Agendas, Meetings, and Minutes
Applications, Licences, and Permits
Boards and Committees
Budget and Finance
By-laws
Careers
Contact Us
Elections
Freedom of Information Requests
Land Acknowledgement
Mayor and Council
News and Notices
Privacy Policy
Public Feedback and Engagement
Reports, Studies, and Plans
Website Legal Disclaimer
Careers
Contact
Book an Appointment
Report a Concern
Expand Search
Home
News and Notices
Posts
New By-laws Protect Trees in Saugeen Shores
New By-laws Protect Trees in Saugeen Shores
-
Oct 28, 2025
News
Saugeen Shores has officially adopted two key by-laws aimed at protecting and enhancing the community’s urban forest: the Tree Protection on Town-Owned Property By-law and the Urban Tree Conservation By-law. Together, these by-laws reinforce the municipality’s commitment to environmental stewardship and responsible growth.
While preparing the Town’s
Urban Tree Canopy Plan (UTCP)
last year, an aerial study found that tree canopy covered 39.6% of the urban settlement area in Saugeen Shores. This coverage allows the community to experience health and cooling benefits from the trees. Based on these findings, recommendations were developed to help conserve the areas contributing the most to the Town’s canopy. A key recommendation of the UTCP included the development and implementation of by-laws that support tree conservation on both Town-owned and private lands.
“These by-laws aim to strike a balance between preservation and property rights by focusing on Town property, environmental protection areas, and areas where development is planned,” said Mayor Charbonneau. “They are a meaningful step forward in protecting the trees that define our community’s character and contribute to our environmental health, reflecting our dedication to sustainability and a balanced approach to growth.”
The Urban Tree Conservation By-law aims to conserve and protect urban tree cover by regulating the injury and destruction of trees on select private property with a focus on promoting responsible tree management and environmental sustainability. The by-law covers lands zoned Environmental Protection (EP) or Planned Development (PD) greater than one hectare within the
Settlement Area Boundary
of Saugeen Shores. This new Town by-law is expected to come into effect on April 1, 2026 to ensure resources are available to support application and enforcement.
The Tree Protection on Town-Owned Property By-law, which will come into effect on January 1, 2026, establishes clear rules to protect and manage trees on Town-owned land, ensuring only the Town or authorized persons may plant, remove, or maintain trees. The by-law also prohibits unauthorized actions such as damaging trees, attaching signs, or applying hazardous materials near them and violations may result in fines.
The Urban Tree Canopy Plan was approved in principle by Saugeen Shores Council in December 2024. It was first proposed by the 2022 Environmental Stewardship Ad-Hoc Advisory Committee (ESAC) and was highlighted in the
2024 Business Plan
(pg 61).
Subscribe
Back to News Search
All Categories
Alerts
Council Highlights
Closures and Disruptions
News
Public Notices
Contact Us
Town of Saugeen Shores
600 Tomlinson Drive, P.O. Box 820
Port Elgin, ON N0H 2C0
Phone
519-832-2008
Toll Free
1-866-832-2008
Fax
519-832-2140
Contact Us
Town of Saugeen Shores
600 Tomlinson Drive, P.O. Box 820
Port Elgin, ON N0H 2C0
Phone
519-832-2008
Toll Free
1-866-832-2008
Fax
519-832-2140
Resources
Accessibility
Freedom of Information
Privacy Policy
Report a Concern
Sitemap
Connect With Us
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
YouTube
© 2026 Town of Saugeen Shores
Made with
Govstack
Back to top
This website uses cookies to enhance usability and provide you with a more personal experience. By using this website, you agree to our use of cookies as explained in our
Privacy Policy
.
Agree